Colonialism and Development: A Comparative Analysis of Spanish and British Colonies
Author(s): Matthew Lange, James Mahoney and Matthias vom Hau
Source: American Journal of Sociology , March 2006, Vol. 111, No. 5 (March 2006), pp.
1412-1462
Published by: The University of Chicago Press


1416

-

TABLE 1
Timing of Colonialism

Country

Spanish colonies:
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bolivia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cuba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dominican Republic . . .
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
El Salvador . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nicaragua . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Paraguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
British colonies:
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bahamas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Barbados . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Belize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brunei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cyprus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Fiji . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hong Kong . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lesotho . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malawi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Myanmar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Onset of
Colonialism

Conclusion of
Colonialism

1580
1538
1541
1536
1524
1511
1493
1534
1524
1524
1524
1521
1523
1519
1537
1533
1625
1528

1819
1825
1818
1819
1821
1899
1821
1822
1821
1821
1821
1821
1821
1821
1811
1824
1828
1821

1788
1783
1756/1857
1627
1798
1885
1888
1610/1763
1878
1882
1871
1888
1874
1814
1842
1757/1857
1655
1886
1884
1891
1786/1874
1810
1826/1885
1840
1861/1885
1857

1901
1973
1947/1971
1966
1981
1966
1984
1867
1960
1922/1935
1970
1965
1957
1966
1999
1947
1962
1963
1966
1964
1957
1968
1948
1907
1960
1947

-

American Journal of Sociology
TABLE 1 (Continued)

Country

Onset of
Colonialism

Conclusion of
Colonialism

Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Solomon Islands . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sri Lanka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sudan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Swaziland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Trinidad/Tobago . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States . . . . . . . . . . .
Zambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Zimbabwe . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1787/1896
1819
1893
1795
1798
1898
1894
1918
1797
1893
1607
1890/1923
1895/1923

1961
1959
1978
1910
1948
1956
1968
1961
1962
1962
1783
1964
1965/1980

Note.—The dates listed here are approximations. Identifying a single starting
point of colonialism is problematic for many cases, given that the initiation of
the process was often gradual and informal. For the Spanish-American cases,
we date the onset of colonialism with the foundation of major settlements or
expeditions that established enduring control over the indigenous population.
The initiation of British colonialism is often especially difficult to date. For example, India was clearly under the grip of the English East India Company by
the 1750s, but it was not proclaimed a colony under control from London until
1857. We note several cases in which multiple dates could be used to mark the
beginning of British colonialism. The conclusion of colonialism corresponds with
the more or less complete defeat and/or withdrawal of colonial authorities rather
than simply the declaration of independence.

the relationship between level of colonialism and postcolonial
development.
The first hypothesis is that mercantilist and liberal powers impose different levels of colonialism in territories with similar levels of precolonial
development. For mercantilist powers, we argue that they are more likely
to pursue extensive institutional establishment in comparatively more
complex (i.e., more economically and politically developed) precolonial
regions; mercantilist powers are less likely to pursue a high level of colonialism in comparatively less complex regions. Our reasoning grows out
of the fact that complex precolonial regions exhibit densely settled populations, statelike political organizations, and hierarchical economies that
often rely on coercive labor systems. These conditions facilitate the mercantilist goal of extracting resources through the use of a dependent labor
force without having to alter radically preexisting economic structures.
By contrast, less complex precolonial regions feature hunter-gatherer and
simple agricultural societies and thus provide mercantilists with fewer
opportunities to build on established economic networks for exploiting
indigenous labor. When mercantilist powers colonize less complex soci

-

Colonialism and Development
eties, therefore, they generally do so without imposing a broad range of
institutional arrangements and without encouraging large-scale
settlement.
Conversely, we argue that liberal economic powers are likely to pursue
low levels of colonialism in more complex precolonial regions, and they
are likely to pursue high levels of colonialism in less complex precolonial
regions. More complex precolonial regions usually exhibit entrenched precapitalist institutions, and these institutions make it difficult for liberal
colonizing powers to alter existing economic networks in ways necessary
to achieve market-based accumulation. Thus, when confronted with a
complex civilization that cannot easily be dislodged, liberal colonizers tend
to implant only a limited range of institutions and a small number of
settlers. By contrast, less complex precolonial regions marked by huntergatherer or simple agricultural societies can be more readily displaced to
make way for the introduction of a broad range of new market institutions
and state organizations. We suggest that liberal powers prefer to colonize
heavily these less complex societies because they allow authorities and
settlers to pursue institutional establishment without having to build on
top of or work through preexisting arrangements.
Our second overall hypothesis concerns the effect of level of colonialism
on postcolonial development. Because level of colonialism describes a
broad range of institutions implanted by colonial occupiers, it is useful
to disaggregate this concept into more specific institutions that operate as
key mechanisms in shaping postcolonial development. We especially focus
on those institutions that regulate (1) commerce and markets (e.g., the
extent of free trade), (2) political authority (e.g., the degree to which a
rule of law is present), and (3) race and ethnicity (e.g., the degree to which
all groups have the same rights). The first is especially important for longrun economic development, the third is especially important for long-run
social development, and the second is highly consequential for both. We
suggest that the content of these institutions varies across particular levels
of mercantilist and liberal colonialism, with major implications for postcolonial development.
For mercantilist colonies, a high level of colonialism greatly inhibits
postcolonial development. More extensive mercantilist colonialism shapes
economic development through the establishment of trade restrictions,
protected merchant guilds, and entrenched actors who benefit from state
privileges. In a capitalist world economy, these mercantilist institutions
are a serious disadvantage. In terms of social development, a high level
of mercantilist colonialism has the additional consequence of establishing
labor institutions and sociocultural conventions that transform the indigenous population (or an imported worker population) into an exploited
ethnoracial group that often lacks access to health care and education.

-

American Journal of Sociology
Insofar as this exploited ethnoracial group represents a large percentage
of the total population, overall social performance will be greatly compromised. Finally, mercantilism breeds patrimonial states whose leaders
are unable—and usually unwilling—to provide competitive markets, education, a rule of law, health care, and other public goods to nonelite
groups. For its part, limited mercantilist colonialism does not allow a
territory to fully escape these calamities. But it does mean that the territory
will be characterized by weaker and less entrenched mercantilist obstacles,
thereby having a higher probability of experiencing socioeconomic development in the postcolonial epoch.
For liberal colonies, conversely, level of colonialism is positively related
to socioeconomic development. More extensive liberal colonialism tends
to direct production toward international trade, which encourages competitiveness within a capitalist world economy and may also benefit human well-being by providing greater resources to state and societal actors.
In addition, higher levels of liberal colonialism can lead to the establishment of coherent administrative, juridical, and police institutions that
provide the basic infrastructure for functioning markets. These institutions enhance socioeconomic development because broad societal groups
often benefit from a state’s ability to enforce a rule of law, administrate
effectively, and provide public goods such as clean water and education.
By contrast, low levels of liberal colonialism have very negative effects
on development. When liberal colonizers do not implant extensive institutions, they generally rule through colonial intermediaries who are
granted authority over the local population in exchange for their collaboration. In turn, by empowering indigenous elites, limited liberal colonialism creates patron-client systems characterized by hierarchy, dependence, and the absence of a rule of law. Moreover, a low level of liberal
colonialism does not introduce state institutions that provide the necessary
infrastructure for coherent markets and social development. Rather, colonial authorities impose a constrained and highly select set of marketlike
institutions that channel resources to individuals in strategic political
positions.
The overall relationships that inform this theory can be summarized
in a three-step model (see fig. 1). In the model, the association between
precolonial level of development (step 1) and postcolonial level of development (step 3) is negative for both mercantilist and liberal colonizers.
However, the directions of the causal processes that mediate this relationship are inverted. Thus, for the mercantilist colonies, initial backwardness is an advantage because it leads to less extensive colonialism,
which in turn has comparatively positive effects on long-run development.
By contrast, for the liberal colonies, a low level of precolonial development

-

Colonialism and Development

Fig. 1.—A model of colonialism and development

is an advantage because it produces more extensive colonization, which
has comparatively positive effects on postcolonial development.
In evaluating this theory, we focus on two colonial powers—Spain and
Britain—that approximate the ideal-types of economic models. In the 16th
and 17th centuries, Spain was characterized by a mercantilist economic
model (Larraz López 1963; Vicens Vives 1969; Walker 1979). Although
by the mid-18th century Spain moved toward more capitalistic economic
arrangements, the trade monopoly in Cadiz remained the key bureaucratic
structure, and monarchs and ministers continued to fixate on bullion extracted from the New World as a central means to stimulate the economy.
In comparison, Britain was never as mercantilist in orientation as Spain,
even in the 17th century, when it first embarked on a colonial project
(Fieldhouse 1966). Moreover, the vast majority of British colonialism occurred after the mid-18th century, by which time Britain was characterized by a liberal economic model that explicitly advocated free trade and
that conceptualized the state as a tool for ensuring law and order.
We do not claim that Britain and Spain perfectly correspond to the

-

American Journal of Sociology
ideal-types of mercantilist and liberal economic models. For example,
Spain gradually became more liberal during the 18th century, and it implanted some capitalistic institutions in previously marginal colonies, such
as Argentina. Indeed, these regions that experienced the introduction of
more liberal institutions often experienced more success in the postcolonial
period. Analogously, we note that the early British colonies in the Caribbean and the American South saw the introduction of coercive labor
institutions, and that this quasi-mercantilist period left an enduring social
legacy. Yet, our main goal is not to explore variation over time in the
extent to which Spain and Britain correspond to the two ideal-types, but
rather to evaluate whether the evidence is broadly consistent with a theory
that assumes Spain is mercantilist and Britain is liberal.
Nor do we wish to suggest that the economic model of the colonizer
and the level of development of the colonized region can completely explain the outcomes examined here. Rather, during particular historical
periods, specific events and processes within colonizers—demographic
trends, religious changes, and politics of the day—also affected colonial
patterns. Likewise, in terms of conditions in the colonial regions, variables
such as the extent of exploitable resources and the prevailing disease
environment shaped how both colonial authorities and settlers approached
institutional establishment. Nevertheless, our goal is to offer a parsimonious framework that can coherently explain a substantial portion—
though certainly not all—of the variation in level of colonialism and
development across the Spanish and British colonies. This framework
also provides a basis for thinking about anomalous cases that do not
correspond with the predicted outcomes. For example, below we shall see
that liberal Britain extensively colonized Hong Kong, despite the fact that
Hong Kong was a densely populated and highly complex society. We
explain this anomaly in light of the organization of the economy in precolonial Hong Kong, which featured open markets and free labor rather
than the typical precapitalist institutions and therefore attracted British
colonization efforts. In this sense, Hong Kong is an exception to the predicted pattern, but also a case that still conforms to the spirit of our
overarching theoretical argument.
Finally, although we focus on the Spanish and British colonies, our
analysis leaves the door open for future research to examine how the
economic orientation of other colonizers shaped the extent of their colonial
efforts and the kinds of institutional legacies they left behind. In this
regard, it is worth noting that colonial powers generally became more
liberal over time as global capitalism gained momentum. Likewise, precolonial regions generally have become more complex as global interconnectedness stimulated the decline of hunter-gatherer and semisedentary
societies (Wallerstein 1974; Wolf 1982). Thus, increasingly liberal powers

-

Colonialism and Development
colonize increasingly developed societies. In this context, we would expect
colonialism to be accompanied by low levels of institutional transfer, given
that liberal colonizers prefer to pursue only limited institutional establishment in complex societies. In turn, our theory suggests that these low
levels of transfer will have negative effects on postcolonial development.
Our theoretical model therefore offers new insights for exploring how
colonialism evolves across world-historical time in tandem with changes
in global economic organization and interconnectedness.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COLONIALISM

In this section, we consider how preexisting levels of development shape
the extent of Spanish and British colonialism. To assess precolonial development, we focus on the size and organization of non-European societies at the onset of colonialism. We especially distinguish between more
complex and populous societies organized politically as protostates versus
less complex and sparsely populated societies characterized by village
farming communities or hunter-gatherer bands. To evaluate level of colonialism, we consider the volume of migration from the colonizing nation,
the size and reach of the colonial state apparatus, the pervasiveness of
labor and stratification systems implemented by the colonizers, and the
extent to which dominant cultural orientations of the colonizing nation
gain prevalence within a colony. Territories with higher levels of colonialism are marked by more settlers, a more significant colonial bureaucracy that reaches into society to uphold systems of property and labor,
and the presence of more religious organizations and other cultural institutions modeled on the colonizing nation.

Spanish Colonies
The Spanish most extensively colonized those areas of the New World
where preexisting civilizations were located. At the time of the conquest,
the Aztec Empire ruled the highlands of central Mexico and parts of
Guatemala, and the Inca Empire dominated much of modern Ecuador,
Peru, and Bolivia. These densely settled and economically advanced societies controlled important deposits of precious metals and mobilized
resident populations for labor services (e.g., Andrien 2001; Carrasco 1976;
D’Altroy 2002; Rostworowski 1988; Smith 1996; Townsend 2001). At the
same time, these historical civilizations were not marked by high levels
of social development; in fact, their consolidation of settled agriculture
and imposition of state-led tribute extraction likely caused a general deterioration of human health (Steckel and Rose 2002). The simultaneous

-

American Journal of Sociology
presence of large quantities of precious metals and readily exploitable
indigenous labor, however, made the regions the obvious choice of settlement for Spanish conquerors who had become accustomed to the occupation of prosperous societies during Spain’s “reconquista” of Muslim
Granada.
A small number of cities in Mexico and the Andes received most of
the settlers during the early and midcolonial period (Boyd-Bowman 1976;
Mörner 1976; Sánchez-Albornoz 1974). In these center areas, the new
settlers established extensive economic, political, and sociocultural institutions.5 For example, slavery was long practiced in the Iberian Peninsula,
and Spanish authorities in the New World combined this instrument with
precolonial models of labor drafts to secure a workforce for the mines
and large agrarian estates. Likewise, the practice of granting monopolistic
guild organizations control over the import-export business and local finance was extended to the New World. Beyond economic institutions,
the center areas also featured the most significant implantation of Spanish
political institutions. In the Viceroyalty of New Spain and the Viceroyalty
of Peru, top-ranking bureaucrats and military officers from Spain oversaw
general administration, legal procedures, public works, and defense. Moreover, the Catholic Church—in tandem with various religious orders—
organized large-scale and well-orchestrated evangelization campaigns in
the colonial centers (Hoberman and Socolow 1986). The purity of blood
doctrine, already employed during the reconquista, gained a prominent
role in the jurisdictions of the colonial administration. The Spanish used
this ideology to justify their elite status and cement their distinction from
“Indians,” a category they invented to designate all of the people indigenous to the Americas.
Before the Spanish arrived, village farming and nonsedentary groups
that lacked significant surplus accumulation and a complex division of
labor characterized much of the New World outside the Aztec and Inca
empires. Although these societies often outperformed the historical civilizations on key social indicators (Steckel and Rose 2002), they were precisely the places where the Spanish did not settle in large numbers (Newson 1985; Sánchez-Albornoz 1974). For example, the southern parts of
Central America, northern regions in South America, and the Southern
Cone of modern Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay were characterized by
smaller-scale agrarian settlements and hunter-gatherer societies. Many of
The regions of modern Guatemala and Colombia also were significant Spanish colonial territories. Guatemala was important because the former Mayan empire left
behind dense and complex indigenous societies; Colombia attracted attention because
of its gold deposits, though the lack of a dense indigenous population in the region
eventually led the Spanish to employ African slaves to work the mines.


-

Colonialism and Development
the most enduring Spanish sociocultural imprints in these areas were left
by religious orders and their missionaries, not the colonial state. Until
well into the colonial period, the Spanish crown paid little attention to
these peripheral regions, as revealed by the relative absence of highranking royal administrators, church officials, and lower bureaucrats (Mahoney 2003). Hence, key parts of the empire in Latin America did not
see the entrenchment of mercantilist institutions during the colonial epoch.
The Caribbean islands that were colonized by the Spanish—most important, Cuba and the Dominican Republic—did not feature highly complex civilizations before the conquest (though the Arawaks of Hispaniola
were sizable in number). Moreover, Spanish warfare and diseases rapidly
and almost completely destroyed those societies that did exist. Nevertheless, especially through the introduction of African slaves and plantation
agriculture, which was accompanied by the appearance of royal officials
and mercantilist elites in larger towns, Cuba and the Dominican Republic
remained reasonably important Spanish colonies within the empire, even
as the center of gravity shifted toward Mexico and Peru (Lockhart and
Schwartz 1983; Pérez 1988).
In summary, before the 18th century, the Spanish colonized most heavily
those areas where a complex civilization was located. We can see this
pattern in table 2, which estimates levels of precolonial development and
levels of colonialism for the modern countries of Spanish America. The
Spearman correlation coefficient for these two variables is .85. Of the 18
cases, 15 are fully consistent with theoretical expectations, and the three
exceptions are not completely out of line: Cuba and the Dominican Republic are scored as having low levels of precolonial development but
experienced intermediate levels of colonialism; Nicaragua had an intermediate level of precolonial development but a low level of colonialism.
The inverse relationship between precolonial development and level of
Spanish colonialism is also present when proxy statistical variables are
used. We employ the absolute size of the precolonial population to measure
precolonial development (see table 2), which is correlated with our own
estimate of precolonial level of development (r p .79 ).6 To estimate levels
of colonialism, we draw on Palmer’s (1977) rankings for level of “Spanish
The statistical literature is usually concerned with population density (i.e., persons
per unit of land) rather than absolute population. For the Spanish-American cases,
population density for 1492 is positively correlated with level of colonialism, though
the correlation is fairly weak (r p .32). We choose not to use population density because
it produces clearly inaccurate estimates of levels of precolonial development in Spanish
America. For example, in 1492 Mexico was only the fifth most densely populated
territory, and Peru was tied for only seventh. These levels are inconsistent with what
we know about precolonial development. By contrast, absolute population size corresponds well with established understandings of precolonial levels of development.


-

American Journal of Sociology
TABLE 2
Levels of Precolonial Development and Colonialism: Spanish Colonies

Country
Argentina . . . . .
Bolivia . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . .
Cuba . . . . . . . . . .
Dominican
Republic . . . .
Ecuador . . . . . . .
El Salvador . . .
Guatemala . . . .
Honduras . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . .
Nicaragua . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . .
Paraguay . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . .
Uruguay . . . . . . .
Venezuela . . . . .

Palmer’s
Rankings
for Colonial
Influence
(1pmost)c

European
Population
ca. 1800
(in 1000s)d
318
419
396
664
59
272

Level of
Precolonial
Developmenta

Level of
Colonialisma

Precolonial
Population
ca. 1492
(in 1000s)b

Low
High
Low
Intermediate
Low
Low

Low
High
Low
Intermediate
Low
Intermediate

900
2,600
1,000
3,000
400
110

13
4.5
12
4.5
16
7

Low
High
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
Low
Low
High
Low
Intermediate

Intermediate
High
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
High
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
Intermediate

500
1,700
750
2,000
850
17,200
825
800
370
8,200
160
1,000

6
9
8
3
11
1
14
10
17
2
18
15

148
138
242
72
2,451
76
76
528
39
371

a
Data for level of precolonial development and level of colonialism are our estimates based on our
previous and current research on the region. See the text for discussions of particular cases.
b
Data for precolonial population ca. 1492 are from Mahoney and vom Hau (2003) except for Cuba,
which is Pérez’s estimate (1988, p. 20), and the Dominican Republic, which is half of Denevan’s (1992,
p. xxiii) estimate for Hispaniola.
c
Data are from Palmer (1977, 1980).
d
Data for European population ca. 1800 are derived from Mahoney and vom Hau (2003) by subtracting
their estimates of the size of the indigenous population in 1800 from the size of the total population in
1800. This method inflates the size of the European population for cases with a substantial African
population, especially Colombia. Cuban data are from Pérez (1988, p. 63).

colonial penetration,” which he derives by aggregating data for 1800 concerning bullion production, bishopric revenue, city population, total population, population density, and total trade. His measure is strongly correlated with our own estimate of level of colonialism (r p .82).
Furthermore, as a second statistical proxy for level of colonialism, we
consider the size of the European population at the end of the colonial
period in 1800.
Precolonial population size and Palmer’s estimate for level of colonialism are positively related to one another (r p .65); likewise, precolonial
population size and European population size in 1800 are very strongly
related (r p .94). These findings again strongly suggest that higher levels
of colonialism occurred in more complex and populous areas.
1426

-

Colonialism and Development
British Colonies
The British Empire was established over a longer period of time and was
more disparate than the Spanish Empire, making generalizations more
problematic. Yet, for analytic purposes, British colonialism can be divided
into four types that generally correspond to different levels of colonialism.
First, the most extensive form was settler colonialism, where permanent
residents transplanted a broad range of institutions from Britain into the
colonies without preserving precolonial arrangements. The British pursued this strategy only in sparsely populated regions that featured a favorable disease climate. Second, when complex precolonial societies were
organized around protostates, the British usually pursued indirect colonialism, allowing precolonial leaders to maintain political and legal power
over their subjects, while requiring them to report and pay taxes to the
colonial administration. This uneasy combination of central bureaucratization and peripheral patrimonialism was the hallmark of indirect British rule, and it was the norm in Africa, though it could also be found in
parts of Asia. In sharp contrast to settler colonialism, indirect colonialism
entailed a low level of institutional transfer from Britain.
Between the extremes of settler colonialism and indirect colonialism,
we identify two intermediary types: direct colonialism and hybrid colonialism. With the former, the British implanted a colonial state that was
unified, bureaucratically organized, and of territory-wide reach. However,
direct colonialism did not feature large-scale and permanent British settlement, often because of the prevailing disease climate. The British pursued direct colonialism in trade-oriented colonies, such as Hong Kong
and Singapore, and plantation colonies, such as the West Indies. Finally,
the hybrid colonies combined indirect colonialism with either settler or
direct colonialism. Indirect colonialism went together with settlement in
a few African colonies, South Africa being the most notable example.
Indirect colonialism was fused with direct colonialism in certain Asian
and Pacific colonies, including those too large to be easily controlled by
a central bureaucracy, such as India.
The four types of colonialism were generally concentrated both geographically and temporally. The British first established settler and directly ruled plantation colonies in the Americas and Australasia, then they
colonized Asian territories through direct and hybrid forms of rule, and
finally they colonized sub-Saharan Africa, Borneo, and a few Pacific Islands through indirect and hybrid forms of rule.
North America and Australasia.—The first British colonies (the future
United States, Canada, and Barbados) were all settler colonies. The introduction of cash crops and slavery, however, quickly transformed Barbados and the territories of the American South from settler colonies of
1427

-

American Journal of Sociology
small farmers to plantation colonies in which British settlers ruled directly
over an imported labor force. A century or more later, the British established two additional settler colonies in Australia (1788) and New Zealand
(1840).
Before the onset of colonialism, these regions displayed sparsely populated precolonial societies without statelike organization—the various
chiefdom societies of North America, the aboriginal groups of Australia,
and the Maoris in New Zealand (Denoon 1983). Diseases and warfare
brought by British colonization efforts decimated these populations, and
those that remained were systematically isolated and oppressed whenever
they came into contact with frontier settlers. In turn, the removal of these
societies set the stage for the wholesale introduction of British institutions;
the settlement colonies evolved into little Great Britains, albeit with a
more rugged character, a more segmented religious structure of often
competing communities, and without a powerful landed aristocracy. Because of the latter, the colonies tended to have active, participatory political institutions and more egalitarian economies, and in this sense they
were more liberal than the metropolis itself (Ferguson 2002).
Like the settler colonies, the plantation colonies of the West Indies were
an ideal area for British settlement because they lacked complex precolonial societies at the advent of colonization—the result of either the absence of indigenous peoples or their speedy demise after the arrival of
Europeans. From the early 17th century until the late 18th century, a
substantial portion of all British settlers to the New World migrated to
these islands, especially Barbados and Jamaica (Galenson 1996). However,
high white mortality rates and low white fertility rates eventually more
than offset these migration inflows. In addition, a tiny British elite soon
monopolized sugar production, leading potential settlers to believe that
the West Indies offered no real economic opportunities.
In the mid-17th century, African slaves became the majority of the West
Indies population, and extractive institutions were constructed to exploit
their labor. As a result, these colonies departed significantly from the other
settler colonies. The laboring classes were more marginalized—politically
and economically—than were their settler counterparts (Beckford 1983).
Even so, the sheer length of British colonialism in the West Indies combined with emancipation and liberalizing reforms beginning in the 1830s
did promote the introduction of participatory political institutions (Lange
2003; Lee 1967). Over time, these colonies witnessed the construction of
colonial administrations with loyalties to Great Britain and the decreasing
influence of plantation elites. Under the system of direct colonialism that
emerged, the British installed police structures and court systems to protect property rights and uphold the political liberties and rights of common
citizens (Lewis 1968).
1428

-

Colonialism and Development
Asian colonies.—Britain’s Asian colonies generally show intermediate
and high levels of precolonial development, and thus our theoretical expectation is that these colonies will be subject to intermediate to low levels
of institutional establishment. In fact, however, British occupation often
resulted in intermediate to high levels of colonial influence because of the
presence of exploitable resources and markets. The Asian colonies therefore only sometimes conform to the predicted inverse relationship between
precolonial development and level of British colonialism.
Hong Kong and Singapore experienced among the greatest levels of
colonial influence within the British Empire. They were ruled purely
through direct administration and featured liberal economies based on
open markets and free labor (Ngo 1999; Ryan 1976). At the time of colonial
conquest, however, Hong Kong was densely populated and part of one
of the world’s most developed empires (Roberts, Ling, and Bradshaw
1992). Singapore, on the other hand, was lightly populated, although it
had historically been on the fringes of the Malacca and Johore Sultinates
(LePoer 1991; Ryan 1976). Despite their prior development, liberal Britain
heavily colonized these areas because of their strategic military and trade
locations. Moreover, the small territorial size of Hong Kong and Singapore
facilitated the bureaucratic task of imposing direct colonialism over the
indigenous populations.
Great Britain also established direct colonialism in Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
even though it featured high levels of precolonial development. Precolonial
Ceylon was ruled through the powerful and centralized Kandyan Kingdom, which was weakened by Portuguese and Dutch interference prior
to British colonialism, yet still required considerable time and resources
for eventual British conquest. Because of its commercial potential and
strategic location, the British imposed centralized administrations in
densely populated Ceylon. Through this mostly direct form of rule, the
colonial state transferred important legal-administrative institutions (de
Silva 1997; Jeffries 1962; Nyrop et al. 1971). In terms of economic institutions, a substantial number of tea plantations could be found in colonial
Ceylon, yet these were enclaves within a larger network of market relations, not totalizing institutions that shaped nearly all aspects of life as
in the West Indies (Beckford 1983).
Forms of hybrid colonialism combining direct and indirect rule were
used in colonial India, growing out of Britain’s unwillingness to dominate
vast and highly populated territories through direct means. Although the
Great Mughal Empire of roughly modern Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh
had declined by the onset of British colonialism, a number of kingdoms—
especially Bengal and Hyderabad—displayed substantial economic and
political power (Bayly 1988; Kulke and Rothermund 1998). As the East
India Company came to exercise quasi-colonial control in the 18th and
1429

-

American Journal of Sociology
early 19th centuries, therefore, it did so against the backdrop of a complex
agrarian-bureaucratic political order that featured centralized administration, permanent armed forces, and relatively efficient tax collection
(Stokes 1973).
In 1857, indigenous elites and disgruntled soldiers led a major revolt
against British rule, which compelled Britain to make India an official
colony under control from London (Bayly 1988; Masani 1960). The revolt
also taught colonial authorities that they could hardly expect simply to
abolish or even ignore local institutions without devastating consequences.
The British solution was to strengthen alliances with elites and to use
them to collect taxes and maintain political order. Thus was born a hybrid
colony that combined indirect and direct forms of colonialism.
Some 600 princely states comprising approximately two-fifths of colonial India were ruled indirectly. The remainder of the colony continued
to be dominated by a direct form of administration that did not incorporate indigenous institutions into the overall system of governance (Kumar 1998; Marshall 1968). Because of the minuscule size of the colonial
administration, however, both directly and indirectly ruled areas experienced rather low levels of colonial influence.7 The colonial state never
extended down to the community level, preexisting religious and sociocultural institutions remained intact, and patrimonial intermediaries were
left as the primary governors even in directly ruled areas (Edwardes 1967;
Kumar 1989). India, Bangladesh, Myanmar, and Pakistan therefore experienced low to intermediate levels of colonial influence.8
The British also combined direct and indirect forms of rule in Malaya.
Although Portuguese and Dutch interference had destroyed the Malacca
Sultanate, Malaya still contained a dozen large and relatively prosperous
sultanates at the onset of British colonialism. During most of the colonial
period, British colonizers maintained very powerful legal-administrative
institutions in certain parts of the Malay Peninsula (the Straits Settlements
and the Federated Malay States). However, these institutions were much
weaker in the Unfederated Malay States, where the British used various
indirect forms of rule (Brown and Ampalavanar 1986; Heussler 1981;
Zawawi 1998; Ryan 1976). Only as independence approached was a more
centralized and bureaucratic system of rule closer to direct colonialism

7
The local state of Awadh, which was directly ruled, had one colonial official for every
295,300 people in 1872. All of colonial India had a ratio of 1 : 267,300 in 1881. By
contrast, Nigeria—which had the fewest officials per capita in British Africa—had a
ratio of 1 : 51,800 in the 1930s (Fisher 1991, p. 8).
8
Colonial Burma—present-day Myanmar—was ruled as a part of the Indian administration until 1937 and therefore has many similarities: one-third of the colony experienced indirect rule, and the colonial administration was quite limited in size.

1430

-

Colonialism and Development
constructed, largely because the colonial state extended its territorial reach
in response to a prolonged guerrilla insurgency.
Sub-Saharan Africa and the Pacific.—The final phase of British colonialism occurred in the Pacific, Borneo, and especially Africa, and it
almost always established indirect forms of rule in complex precolonial
societies. As such, these colonies conform to the theoretical model: high
levels of precolonial development promoted low levels of British
colonialism.
In sub-Saharan Africa, British colonies were founded in modern Botswana, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Most of these regions were characterized by complex and populated precolonial societies, which discouraged British migration and institutional establishment.9 Instead British colonizers pursued indirect rule,
exercising power through customary institutions and without completely
displacing existing political structures, courts, and landholding patterns
(Fage 2002; July 1998). In fact, usually only a few hundred British administrators were responsible for overseeing indirect rule in each colony.
This form of colonialism, however, did not leave local social structures
unchanged. Rather, British colonialism radically transformed local social
and political structures by granting chiefs substantial power and upholding their authority under nearly all circumstances. Thus, although indirect
colonialism supposedly worked through only precolonial channels, the
local institutions used by the British were to varying extents colonial
constructs themselves (Mamdani 1996).
At the onset of colonialism, West Africa contained a number of political
units along the coasts with ties to larger kingdoms in the hinterland. In
modern Ghana, the Ashanti Kingdom participated in the coastal slave
trade with European merchants and specialized in long-distance exchange
along trans-Saharan trade routes (Ajayi and Crowder 1971; Fage 2002;
Oliver 1999). Although early on the British did try to settle the area, the
combination of local resistance and high mortality rates made these efforts
unprofitable and undesirable. Instead, the British allowed the Ashanti
chiefs largely unconstrained control over administration, not enforcing
taxation until the 1930s and not disrupting most landholding patterns at
9

The British colonies in Africa correspond nicely with areas that Oliver and Atmore
(2005) identify as African states in 1884 (see also Collins, Burns, and Ching 1994, p.
6D). More generally, we judge African societies to be complex and populous in light
of other precolonial societies, including those of Latin America in roughly 1500. Given
this frame of comparison, precolonial Africa was actually more populated than precolonial Latin America. For example, sub-Saharan Africa in 1900 had 4.4 persons per
square kilometer, whereas Latin America in 1500 had only 2.2 persons. See Herbst
(2000, p. 16).

1431

-

American Journal of Sociology
least until the cocoa boom in the late 1920s. In precolonial Nigeria, the
Sokoto Caliphate in the north brought together various emirates under
Islamic rule, while the diffuse Yoruba Empire linked coastal settlements
with political groups in the interior through the powerful Kingdom of
Oyo. The British were hardly prepared to commit the resources necessary
to govern Nigeria’s approximately 20 million people; rather, a few hundred officials worked with the existing power structures of Yorubaland
and the Islamic north. Although each colony differed in minor ways, this
process of conquest, cooptation, and colonial rule through local elites
occurred throughout the British Empire in eastern and southern Africa,
and it allowed the British a low-cost means of ruling vast territories with
relatively large and complex indigenous populations (Alpers 1975;
Crowder 1968; Ibrahim 1985; Kaniki 1985; Oliver and Atmore 2005; Wolff
1974; Wrigley 1996).
In a few cases, specifically South Africa, Zimbabwe, Kenya, and Zambia, the British established a hybrid form of indirect settler colonialism.
Whereas the full-blown settler colonies featured a “frontier of exclusion”
that shut out indigenous groups, these indirect settler colonies were
marked by a “frontier of inclusion” between settlers and indigenous labor
situated within the same territory (Abernethy 2000, p. 56). The white
settler and indigenous populations lived under separate institutions—the
settlers in direct systems of colonialism, the Africans in indirect systems—
yet the former depended on the latter for labor. Thus, especially in South
Africa, British indirect settler colonialism resembled Spanish colonialism
in the more central areas, even though Britain in most cases did not follow
Spain’s mercantilist restrictions on trade and commerce.
The British also occupied a few Pacific islands with substantial indigenous populations—Fiji and the Solomon Islands—during its final phase
of colonialism. At the onset of British domination, numerous chiefdoms
were present in both Fiji and the Solomon Islands, those on Fiji being
considerably larger than those on the Solomon Islands. Like the indirect
settler colonies in Africa, a bifurcated system of rule was created: the
British colonial state indirectly ruled the indigenous populations of Fiji
and the Solomon Islands, while British plantation elites directly governed
commercial enclaves (Bennett 1987; Gorman and Mills 1994). The larger
plantations and fairly substantial administration in colonial Fiji indicate
an intermediate level of colonial influence that corresponds with this region’s intermediary level of precolonial development. On the other hand,
the Solomon Islands, which was a marginal colony, experienced lower
levels of colonialism than expected, given its low level of precolonial
development.
Sarawak, North Borneo, and Brunei, all of which are located on the
island of Borneo, also became colonies during this final period. Sarawak
1432

-

Colonialism and Development
and North Borneo were sparsely populated prior to colonization and
experienced only low levels of colonial influence. Eventually, however,
the two merged with Malaya, becoming exposed to a more centralized
and direct form of colonialism during the independence period.10 Brunei,
which had been an extensive empire stretching as far as the Malay Peninsula and the Philippines, fell under British control after conquests whittled its territory down to little more than a city-state. As in Malaya, the
sultan remained only a figurehead, and the British usurped considerable
legal and administrative duties. Thus, the British colonies on Borneo are
similar to several other colonies in Asia as their levels of colonialism are
not inversely related to their level of precolonial development.
Discussion.—From a bird’s-eye perspective the extent of British colonialism is inversely related to level of precolonial development. Notably,
however, British colonial Asia as a whole does not conform to this generalization. The British heavily colonized many of these populous and
developed territories because of some combination of their small size,
strategic trade location, and resource endowments. In this sense, because
the Asian colonies offered good possibilities for capitalist accumulation,
the British were drawn to impose direct colonialism despite the evident
difficulties of doing so.
We can infer the overall relationships from table 3, which includes data
on precolonial levels of development, precolonial population density, and
the percentage of total population comprised by Europeans at the end of
the colonial period. In contrast to the Spanish colonies, the relationship
between precolonial development and the level of colonialism is negative
(r p ⫺.37), showing that areas with lower levels of development generally
experienced higher levels of colonialism. The relationship, however, is
relatively weak because the Asian and Pacific colonies actually exhibit a
positive relationship between precolonial development and level of colonialism.11 Without the Asian and Pacific colonies, the relationship is
considerably stronger (r p ⫺.65).
Population density at the onset of colonialism is an alternative measure

10
Overall, Malaysia had an intermediate level of colonialism as well as an intermediate
level of precolonial development, and therefore the case supports our theoretical expectations. Yet, a closer look shows that the subcomponents of Malaysia actually do
not confirm these expectations: Malaya had relatively high levels of precolonial development, yet intermediate to high levels of colonial influence, and North Borneo
and Sarawak had low levels of precolonial development, yet low levels of colonial
influence.
11
The Asian and Pacific colonies are Bangladesh, Brunei, Fiji, Hong Kong, India,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Pakistan, Singapore, the Solomon Islands, and Sri Lanka. For
these cases, the correlation between precolonial level of development and level of
colonialism is .15.

1433

-

TABLE 3
Levels of Precolonial Development and Colonialism: British Colonies

Country

Australia . . . . . . . .
Bahamas . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . .
Barbados . . . . . . . .
Belize . . . . . . . . . . . .
Botswana . . . . . . .
Brunei . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . .
Cyprus . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . .
Fiji . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . .
Guyana . . . . . . . . . .
Hong Kong . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . .
Lesotho . . . . . . . . . .
Malawi . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . .
Myanmar . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . .
Sierra Leone . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . .
Solomon
Islands . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . .
Sri Lanka . . . . . . .
Sudan . . . . . . . . . . .
Swaziland . . . . . . .
Tanzania . . . . . . . .
Trinidad/
Tobago . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . .
United States . . .

European
Population
at End of
Colonialism
(% total)c

Level of
Precolonial
Developmenta

Level of
Colonialisma

Precolonial
Population
Density
(persons per km2)b

Low
Low
High
Low
Low
Intermediate
High
Low
High
High
Intermediate
Intermediate
High
Low
High
High
Low
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
High
Low
High
High
Intermediate
Low

High
Intermediate
Low-intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
Intermediate
High
Intermediate-high
Low-intermediate
Low-intermediate
Low
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate-high
Low-intermediate
Intermediate
Low-intermediate
Low
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low-intermediate
High
Low
Low-intermediate
Low
Intermediate-high

.03
.10
176.69
2.32
.44
.21
3.8
.02
20.56
7.53
6.02
30
10.99
.1
172.72
63.57
.92
5.71
5.77
7.97
3.04
0
12.17
.37
21.41
14.27
23.74
.5

98.7
11.2
!.1
5.1
2.9
1
7.3
96.8
1.2

Low
Intermediate
High
High
Intermediate
Intermediate

Low
Intermediate-high
Intermediate
Low
Low
Low

3.36
1.23
34.81
2.53
4.94
4.53

.7
21.4
!.1
!.1
1.4
.3

Low
High
Low

Intermediate
Low
High

3.9
15.22
.09

!.1

-

2.7
!.1
!.1

2.9
.7
!.1
1.1
.5
.3
.3
.2
.9
!.1
94.7
!.1
!.1
!.1
1

4.2
81.2

Colonialism and Development
TABLE 3 (Continued)

Country

Level of
Precolonial
Developmenta

Level of
Colonialisma

Precolonial
Population
Density
(persons per km2)b

Zambia . . . . . . . . . .
Zimbabwe . . . . . .

Intermediate
High

Low
Low-intermediate

1.01
1.29

European
Population
at End of
Colonialism
(% total)c

3
7.9

a
Data for level of precolonial development and level of colonialism are our estimates based on our
previous and current research on British colonialism. See the text for discussions of particular cases.
b
Data for this variable are estimated from McEvedy and Jones (1978), Kuczynski (1939, 1948, 1949,
1953), British Colonial Office (1953, 1955, 1958), and Roberts et al. (1992). The indigenous population
on most former British colonies in the Caribbean disappeared rapidly after contact with the Europeans
and was completely or nearly wiped out by the time permanent colonial settlements—often Spanish—
were established (Hurwitz and Hurwitz 1971; Newson 1976; Campbell 1988). Therefore, this project uses
the lower estimates of the population at the time of colonialism, as these figures appear to be a more
accurate estimate of the size of the indigenous population at the onset of formal colonialism.
c
Most data come from British Colonial Office (1953, 1955, 1958) and Kuczynski (1939, 1948, 1949,
1953). A score of 0.1% was used as the minimum. Data were not found for Bangladesh, India, Myanmar,
and Sudan, yet their score is almost certainly below 0.1%.

for precolonial development and, as expected, has a strong and positive
relationship with our estimate of precolonial development (r p .71 ) and
a moderate and negative relationship with level of British colonialism
(r p ⫺.43). A useful statistical proxy for level of colonialism is the percentage of the total population that is European at the end of the colonial
period. This statistical proxy is negatively related to both precolonial
population density and our measure of precolonial development (⫺.75
and ⫺.60, respectively). Thus, opposite from what we found for Spanish
colonialism, the British tended to pursue higher levels of colonialism and
settle more extensively in those precolonial regions with less people and
less institutional complexity.

THE EFFECTS OF COLONIAL INSTITUTIONS

Recent literature shows that, as a generalization, the territories with relatively high levels of development before colonialism declined during and
after the colonial period, whereas those with lower levels of precolonial
development improved their relative position (Acemoglu et al. 2002). Our
research suggests that—for economic development—the reversal took
place roughly from 1750 to 1850 for the Spanish American colonies, the
British settler colonies, and the British colonies in Asia. By contrast, the
economic reversal occurred roughly from 1850 to 1950 for most of the
British colonies in Africa and the West Indies. Here we account for these
reversals in light of the institutions that the Spanish and British left
behind, especially legal-administrative institutions that regulated com1435

-

American Journal of Sociology
merce and markets and that shaped the capacity of states and societal
actors to implement developmental projects.
Although not acknowledged in the recent literature, there was in fact
no great reversal for social development, given that the most politically
complex and economically prosperous precolonial societies were not the
most socially developed societies. Rather, the economically and politically
developed precolonial societies usually simply remained as poor social
performers throughout the colonial and postcolonial period, whereas the
less economically and politically developed precolonial societies continued
to be the better social performers. Here we show how Spanish and British
colonial institutions—especially those regulating race and ethnicity—
caused the persistence of these trajectories of social development.
Spanish Colonialism and Economic Development
During the 18th century, Bourbon monarchs implemented modernizing
reforms in Spanish America that helped trigger the reversal of levels of
economic development (Andrien 2001; Cotler 1978; Guardino and Walker
1992). After the War of the Spanish Succession (1700–1713), the Bourbon
rulers began to allow European allies intermittent access to trade in the
New World. By the end of this century, they introduced free trade in most
parts of the empire and reduced tariffs and fees obstructing trade between
the colonies and the Spanish mainland. These Bourbon reforms and technological improvements in shipping stimulated a dramatic increase in
export production within the colonies.
However, the contrasting levels of mercantilist colonialism in the region
differentially prepared territories to capitalize on the new trade opportunities. Territories that experienced high levels of colonialism during the
16th and 17th centuries were unable to respond effectively. In these colonial centers, powerful merchant guilds, or consulados, exercised a monopoly over trade during the late colonial and early independence periods.
The individuals who controlled these guilds used their position to underpay producers, overcharge consumers, and stifle market competition
(Brading 1971; Kicza 1983). While such practices enriched a select group
of economic elites, they provided little basis for the kind of investment
needed to stimulate growth in the more competitive markets of the 18th
and early 19th centuries. Likewise, colonial restrictions on trade and the
transport of goods were specifically designed to assist mineral-rich and
populous colonial centers at the expense of peripheral regions in the empire. Once the Bourbons relaxed trade restrictions and allowed for greater
movement of goods, the previously protected economic elites of the colonial centers could not compete in an open market.
To make matters worse, Spain installed state institutions in these regions
1436

-

Colonialism and Development
primarily to oversee economic extraction and not to promote local development among the settler community. The consequence was that, as
wealth increasingly came to depend on facilitating export production and
stimulating local industries, state actors could not easily switch from extraction to capitalism. While the Bourbon Reforms improved the bureaucratic functioning of colonial state organizations, over the long run
the states in the colonial centers continued to lack clear rules for governing
internal positions and an enforcement system for punishing abuses among
political officials and colonial settlers. As a result, state officials often
simply pursued individual gains through rent seeking, which further undercut the establishment of a functioning rule of law accessible to broad
sectors of society.
The specific ways in which such mercantilist institutions contributed
to economic decline varied from case to case. In Peru, for example, economic elites faced enormous pressure when Bourbon reformers opened
Atlantic ports and reorganized the political boundaries of the colonial
empire. Colonial and postindependence state leaders proved unable to
initiate even the most basic reforms to enhance profitability and induce
competition in the mining sector. As a consequence, silver mining remained dominated by undercapitalized small-scale operations, and Peru
declined rapidly alongside dwindling revenue collection in the mid-18th
century. In Ecuador, merchant elites oversaw public monopolies that controlled what was a flourishing wool economy. Yet, with free-trade reforms,
these elites were unable to adjust and compete with foreign textiles, which
soon came to dominate the Andean market. Moreover, the state failed to
reinvest resources from the wool industry into other potentially profitable
sectors (Andrien 1995). At the time of independence, therefore, Ecuador
was among the poorest countries in Latin America. Even Mexico began
to experience the long-term negative effects of relying on a monopolistic
mineral-based economy when its economy went into sharp decline in the
late colonial and early independence periods (Coatsworth 1998; Fisher
1985; Jacobsen and Puhle 1986). Economic historians explain this failure
by pointing to factors such as the inability of the Mexican state to pursue
the creation of capital markets (Haber 1997) and the reluctance of politically powerful landed elites and mineral interests to embrace capitalist
investment fully (Hansen 1971).
The trajectory of development was quite distinct for peripheral regions
such as Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Although some cases
were exceptions (e.g., Honduras), economic elites and state organizations
developed in a more liberal direction in the peripheries of the Spanish
empire than in its centers (Mahoney 2003). These areas usually did not
see the development of state protections comparable to the consulados in
Lima and Mexico City, and therefore faced stiffer competition from legal
1437

-

American Journal of Sociology
rivals and contraband (Halperı́n Donghi 1985). In many cases, the peripheral areas saw the emergence of coherent state organizations only
with the onset of the Bourbon reforms and the creation of new administrative units in the empire. The new states tended to be controlled by
economic elites whose power was grounded in the international trade of
agricultural exports, such as coffee, sugar, and livestock products. In fact,
elites in these areas often opposed mercantilist institutions that interfered
with the movement of commerce and actively mobilized for the opening
of markets (Halperı́n Donghi 1985; Lynch 1958; Knight 2001). It is important to note, however, that the new state institutions in the peripheral
areas lacked the efficient internal structure and dense ties to societal
groups necessary for broad-based development (Evans 1995). As a result,
no area in Spanish America was institutionally prepared to rise to and
remain at the top of the world hierarchy in development.
With the Bourbon reforms, nevertheless, the peripheral territories with
powerful liberal elites were poised to experience significant economic
growth driven by exports in expanding colonial and European markets
(Burkholder and Johnson 1998). For instance, Venezuela developed
through the export of cacao to Mexico and Spain (McKinley 1985). Likewise, Argentina and Uruguay experienced huge increases in the production of wheat and livestock (Rock 1987). Indeed, by the early 19th century,
these two countries were among the richest nations in the non-European
world, largely because of the profits deriving from these key export sectors.
Even landlocked Paraguay witnessed substantial economic growth induced by the export of yerba (Whigham 1991). Development in Chile and
Costa Rica had been stifled by Peru and Guatemala, respectively, throughout the colonial period. However, at independence these former colonial
backwaters experienced rapid growth, with Chile gaining prosperity
through mineral and wheat exports, and Costa Rica rising up via the
production of coffee. While the wars of independence inflicted political
turmoil and economic stagnation across all of Spanish America, the former
colonial peripheries recovered faster when compared to the colonial centers (Coatsworth 1998). By 1850, many of the former colonial backwaters
again witnessed expanding exports and increasing public revenues. Thus,
the former colonial peripheries became the primary beneficiaries of the
gradual incorporation of 19th-century Spanish America into the world
economy. They did so not because of mercantilist institutions created by
Spanish colonizers, but because these institutions were largely absent.
Spanish Colonialism and Social Development
Economic and sociocultural institutions designed to exploit and oppress
indigenous people strongly shaped colonial and postcolonial trajectories
1438

-

Colonialism and Development
of social development in Spanish America. On the one hand, these institutions were critical because they ensured that indigenous people themselves would experience low levels of social development. In turn, this
reality made it much more difficult for countries with large indigenous
populations (e.g., Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Guatemala) to
achieve high levels of social development. On the other hand, institutions
regulating indigenous people were consequential because they affected the
proclivity and capacity of colonial and postcolonial states to pursue social
welfare development more generally throughout society. In particular,
state authorities in peripheral Spanish colonies with very small indigenous
populations (e.g., Argentina, Costa Rica, and Uruguay) were more willing
and able to build infrastructure and create public goods that benefited
all citizens.
Spanish institutions had almost uniformly negative consequences for
the indigenous populations in the colonies, but the specific nature of these
consequences varied across territories with greater and lesser levels of
colonialism. In the most central and populated areas of the colonial empire, major institutions were fundamentally designed to exploit indigenous
labor; the Spanish pursued institutional development precisely to appropriate the fruits of indigenous labor and thereby enhance their own material well-being. For example, in Mexico, the infamous encomienda legally entitled Spanish elites to temporary labor services from a designated
number of Indians, while in Peru the mita obligated the male indigenous
population to work in agriculture, textile industries, and especially the
mines for a specified period. Likewise, colonial jurisdictions maintained
ethnoracial hierarchies betweens Indians and Spaniards and legally imposed heavy taxes on the indigenous population, which became a key
source of state revenue in the colonial centers (Cole 1985; Florescano 1975;
Mörner 1985; Spalding 1970; Stern 1993).
Outside the center areas, the Spanish also created institutions to extract
surplus from indigenous people, but the precolonial societies here often
had no formal tribute systems and thus were much more difficult to
exploit. Furthermore, once diseases and conquest took their toll, the indigenous populations were often scattered or small in these areas (Newson
1985). As a result, many of the most important colonial institutions in the
peripheries evolved into instruments designed simply to oppress the indigenous population, either by trying to turn them into docile Christian
subjects or, increasingly, by simply eliminating them (on the distinction
between exploitation and oppression, see Wright [1997]). For example,
many of the most successful Jesuit missions in the New World were found
in the more marginal colonial territories. Likewise, it was in the colonial
peripheries where military leaders engaged in outright extermination campaigns against indigenous people (Halperı́n Donghi 1993; MacLeod 1984).
1439

-

American Journal of Sociology
By contrast, in the colonial centers, where elites relied on indigenous labor
for their material well-being, the complete elimination of the indigenous
population was never the goal.
In addition to differences in the relative importance of exploitation
versus oppression, territories with varying levels of colonialism also of
course differed in the size of their indigenous populations. In fact, relative
size differentials among the territories with alternative levels of colonialism were reinforced over time, such that by the 19th and 20th centuries
the former colonial peripheries sometimes had few or almost no indigenous
people, whereas the former colonial centers still concentrated hundreds
of thousands or even millions of indigenous people (Mahoney and vom
Hau 2003). Because Spanish exploitation and oppression everywhere
made the indigenous population a grossly impoverished subsection of
society, these size differentials had obvious and major effects on levels of
social development in the region, almost ensuring that areas with a sparse
indigenous population would be the most socially developed parts of Spanish America (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos 1994; Mahoney 2003).
The varying degrees of colonial exploitation and the differences in the
size of the indigenous population also affected state orientations toward
the provision of public goods and the promotion of human welfare. The
center territories of the Spanish empire were extremely unequal societies,
with a strict spatial and cultural separation between concentrated and
impoverished indigenous communities in the rural areas and more affluent
Spanish and mestizo communities in the urban areas. In the wealthy cities
of the center regions, the Spanish population had access to doctors, hospitals, schools, and even sometimes universities by the late colonial period
(Haring 1947; Castañeda 1990). However, the vast majority of the overall
population—usually indigenous people—lived in the countryside, and social and health services were not available here (Socolow 1996). Indeed,
the various economic and sociocultural boundaries separating indigenous
and nonindigenous groups, ultimately founded in exploitative colonial
institutions, prohibited the possibility of these two groups sharing specialized knowledge with one another. Moreover, reigning economic rationale and widespread ethnoracism ensured that postcolonial state authorities would largely abstain from sponsoring investment in education
or administering social services in the countryside.
By contrast, social development gradually improved in the more marginal Spanish territories of the colonial periphery. In these areas, ethnoracial distinctions became less prevalent, Europeans and mestizos emerged
as the largest part of the population, and social mobility was more common
(Zulawski 1990; Lockhart and Schwartz 1983). With the onset of the
Bourbon Reforms and increased economic growth in these peripheral
territories, the social infrastructure also improved. State authorities in1440

-

Colonialism and Development
vested in water supply and basic health care. Likewise, the continued
inflow of relatively educated immigrants from Spain and elsewhere in
Europe (Mörner 1976) had a positive effect on the social development of
the overall population.12
During the 19th century, the newly independent states of Spanish America formally rejected the ethnoracial hierarchies of the colonial period and
aspired to integrate the different social and ethnic groups into national
communities imagined as liberal and egalitarian. Throughout the region,
state investments in health and education increased considerably (Halperı́n Donghi 1985; Safford 1985). Yet, these advances occurred least
dramatically in the countries with a dense indigenous population, such
as Ecuador, Guatemala, Peru, and Bolivia. Furthermore, especially in the
former colonial centers, postcolonial state elites pursued the privatization
of communal lands held by indigenous communities. These reforms eroded
rural solidarity and kinship networks, fostered land scarcity in the countryside, and increased rural-to-urban migration—all of which had very
negative consequences for social development.
By contrast, countries with a sparse indigenous population saw less
disruptive processes of agrarian commercialization. Moreover, the liberal
elites of former colonial peripheries viewed the high levels of European
migration in their countries as signs of progress and civilization, emboldening them to pursue more inclusive social policies. In the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, Argentina, Uruguay, and Costa Rica became regional
pioneers in extending public education and state infrastructure to rural
areas. In Uruguay and Costa Rica, in particular, state leaders implemented
significant social welfare reforms in the first half of the 20th century. Thus,
the distinct trajectories of social development in former colonial centers
and former colonial peripheries were significantly grounded in contrasting
Spanish modes of controlling indigenous people. In central areas with a
dense indigenous population, intense exploitation and the creation of stark
ethnoracial boundaries during the colonial period ensured low levels of
social development among indigenous people over the long run and reduced state elites’ commitment to the creation of public goods in the
postcolonial period. By contrast, in the more marginal territories where
smaller indigenous populations were harshly oppressed but less systematically exploited, future state leaders were confronted with fewer institutional obstacles hindering the promotion of social welfare among the
mostly European and mestizo population that remained.
12
As a countervailing trend, however, the migration of slaves from Africa, many of
whom formed part of the labor force in the peripheral colonies, decreased the level of
social development in these areas. Between 1701 and 1810, some 578,600 African slaves
were imported to Spanish America (Curtin 1969, pp. 116–19).

1441

-

American Journal of Sociology
British Colonialism and Economic Development
When the British heavily settled a region, they tended to create institutions—especially legal codes to coordinate markets and bureaucracies—
that were favorable to economic development. By contrast, when the
British did not heavily settle an area, they tended to impose few institutions to regulate the economy and state, and those that they did impose
often had adverse consequences for development. As a result, some former
British colonies are among the richest countries in the world, whereas
others are among the poorest.
In the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, British
colonialism laid the basis for future economic prosperity by leaving behind
a functioning legal system that could sustain capitalist development. Effective court systems and local policing institutions that enforced contracts
underpinned the stable property rights emphasized by economic historians
(e.g., North 1990). A classic example is the powerful county courts of New
England, whose judges were in the position to respond in broadly impersonal ways to property conflicts and contract fraud, and who could
enforce juridical decisions through professional law officers (Cook 1976;
Knöbl 1998). More generally throughout the settler colonies, the commonlaw system protected colonists from arbitrary state action and provided
a barrier to the instrumental use of colonial government for the enrichment
of elite segments.13
The land policies of the British crown also reflected the authority of
the colonial state over elite interests. In the settler colonies, the respective
local bodies of the colonial state were regarded as the principal owners
of land. The state carefully controlled land distribution and the pace of
settlement, including by regulating minimum and maximum acreages and
by setting land prices. Land policies in turn reinforced the prevalence of
smallholders and prevented the formation of powerful landed elites with
the capacity to establish monopolistic structures harmful to long-run economic development. Moreover, the land policies in British settlement colonies facilitated economic transactions among farmers and planters (Adelman 1994; Coatsworth 1993; Solberg 1987). For instance, smallholder
loans led to the creation of the first major banks and stock markets in
the postcolonial period (e.g., Haber 1991).
British rule also had positive legacies in several directly ruled colonies.
In Hong Kong and the Straits Settlements (Malacca, Penang, and Sin13
Although the legal institutions did not support a rent-seeking landed elite, the courts
were not completely unbiased. Horwitz (1977) finds that the American legal system
systematically enforced the interests of business over farmers, workers, and consumers,
thereby assisting capitalist expansion when obstacles were present. See also Bensel
(1990) and Sanders (1999).

1442

-

Colonialism and Development
gapore), for example, extensive legal institutions were created (Heussler
1981; Ngo 1999; Ryan 1976). In addition, these colonies were founded as
free ports and therefore had tax and labor systems in place that helped
each take advantage of their strategic trading location to become global
economic centers (Huff 1994; Meyer 2000).
In colonies with plantation systems, however, the legacy of direct British
rule was less straightforward because of the presence of powerful elites
who had the potential to capture state institutions and obstruct free markets. Although common-law institutions and representative assemblies
were created in the plantation colonies, the landed European elite were
able to exert considerable control over these institutions until the 1940s
and thereby protect plantation interests at the expense of others. In the
colonial American South, for instance, the legislative assemblies and legal
systems were dominated by plantation owners. Likewise, in order to maintain control over a large and cheap labor force, West Indies planters during
the postemancipation era were able to pressure the colonial administration
to implement legislation that prevented former slaves from buying or
successfully managing their lands (Adamson 1972; Beckford 1983; Young
1958). In turn, elite domination of the state and society limited economic
diversification and dynamism (Beckford 1983; Ferleger 1985; Mandle
1974).
While settler colonialism and direct colonialism established state institutions conducive to economic growth, and while plantation colonies featured forms of direct rule with less beneficial consequences, the indirectly
ruled colonies of Britain unambiguously displayed institutions not conducive to economic development. In many African colonies, the British
did not engage in either the establishment of a functioning rule of law or
the creation of an effective administration. In addition, the implementation of indirect rule enhanced the power of indigenous elites to use
colonial taxation systems and control of customary law for personal enrichment. As a consequence, patrimonial and fragmented states emerged
throughout British Africa (Mamdani 1996; Boone 1994; Migdal 1988;
Lange 2004). The construction of agricultural monopsonies via marketing
boards also allowed state officials and other elites to gain huge rents by
underpaying peasants for their produce; this, in turn, promoted an unproductive economic elite, weak peasant production, and the preeminence
of dysfunctional markets (Bates 1981). The institutions of indirect rule
thus amounted to a formula for economic disaster.
In India, hybrid colonialism also allowed elite intermediaries to
strengthen their control of land and labor and thereby obstruct free economic production (Edwardes 1967; Kumar 1989). In the indirectly ruled
areas, the British guaranteed protection to oppressive local elites, who
otherwise likely would have faced major rebellions from rural producers
1443

-

American Journal of Sociology
(Kulkarni 1964). In the directly ruled areas, officials employed indigenous
elites for a number of activities because of the general absence of the
colonial administration, especially in the rural areas (Gopal 1963). In many
instances, local elites were also given rights to large tracts of land and
were thereby able to control villages technically under British administration (Kumar 1989). The concentration of these duties and powers in
elite hands, in turn, made possible the hyperexploitation of the peasantry,
something that appears to have caused lower agricultural production and
investment in public goods even after the end of colonialism (Banerjee
and Iyer 2005).
Although similar in some ways, India’s hybrid colonialism differed from
indirect colonialism. In particular, the central administration in colonial
India was larger and more bureaucratically organized than its counterpart
in indirectly ruled colonies (Kohli 2004). As a result, in postcolonial India,
the central state could sometimes act more corporately and effectively in
policy implementation, especially when state action did not require complex linkages with societal groups. For instance, the Indian state had
important successes in promoting information technology industries, an
outcome that required neither active state intervention at the local level
nor the transformation of local power relations (Evans 1995).
The colonial institutions of other hybrid colonies similarly left a mixed
economic legacy. Malaysia, for example, had extremely powerful legaladministrative institutions in parts of the Malaya Peninsula; yet these
institutions were much weaker in Sarawak, North Borneo, and the Unfederated Malay States, where the British imposed different forms of
indirect rule (Brown and Ampalavanar 1986; Emerson 1937; Heussler
1981; Zawawi 1998). Consequently, economic development has been
mostly limited to formerly directly ruled areas on the Malay Peninsula,
even though state efforts to promote industrialization during the postcolonial period were generally quite successful (Harper 1999; Jomo 1993).
In South Africa, segmented economies and divided legal-administrative
institutions were also present, but these patterns came about because of
racial segregation, not because of the amalgamation of colonial regions
with different forms of colonial rule (Mamdani 1996; Marx 1998). Here
the white territories featured effective legal-administrative institutions
and a superb economic infrastructure, while the black areas were neglected and under the control of powerful chiefs who collaborated with
the apartheid regime. Thus, economic development has been regionalized
in Malaysia and racialized in South Africa.
In sum, the British colonies that experienced the greatest colonial institutional transfer—the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
Hong Kong, and Singapore—saw the establishment of a rule of law and
functioning markets, while the parts of the British Empire that had the
1444

-

Colonialism and Development
least colonial influence—extractive colonies in sub-Saharan Africa and
South Asia—exhibited institutions that were impediments to growth in a
capitalistic world economy. Alternatively, the colonies that experienced
an intermediate level of colonial influence—mainly the plantation colonies
and the areas with hybrid forms of colonialism—were left with a mixed
economic legacy.
British Colonialism and Social Development
In the colonies with high levels of colonial influence, market institutions
not only ensured future economic prosperity but also set the stage for
improved social performance. For instance, in the late-19th-century
United States, rapid economic growth and industrialization promoted investment in primary education and enhanced the population’s social wellbeing through nutrition and basic health care. By the late 19th century,
Australia also had achieved decades of vigorous economic growth, which
coincided with increasing labor mobilization and substantial investments
in social facilities (Denoon and Mein-Smith 2000; Pike 1970). By contrast,
former British colonies in sub-Saharan Africa and India did not witness
periods of sustained economic development and therefore did not experience the beneficial spillover effects of long-term economic prosperity on
social development.14
In addition, the legal-administrative institutions of British colonies directly affected the capacity of the state to provide public goods such as
education, health care, sanitation, and poverty relief—all of which had
their own reciprocal spillover effects on economic development. In the
United States, these capacities were developed largely after the War of
Independence. In most other colonies, state provision of public goods
began during the colonial period, often in response to political mobilization
by indigenous groups. For example, pressures for social investment began
to mount during the Depression and escalated even further after World
War II, resulting in changes in colonial policy that earmarked at least
some funds for welfare development (Goldsworthy 1971; Lee 1967).
The extent of social development that was actually achieved, however,
depended on the available state infrastructure (Lange 2004). In cases of
direct colonialism, large and bureaucratically organized state apparatuses
made possible the provision of numerous public goods. Alternatively, in
indirectly ruled territories, colonial rule left ineffective administrations,
and the general incapacity of the colonial states obstructed postwar social
14
An important empirical exception to this argument is the state of Kerala in India.
As this case illustrates, better overall social performance can be achieved even in the
absence of sustained economic growth (Drèze and Sen 1989; Heller 1999).

1445

-

American Journal of Sociology
development, leaving several British colonies with some of the lowest
education rates and life expectancies in the world.
Legal-administrative institutions also indirectly affected social development by shaping the ability of individuals to pursue their own wellbeing. In directly ruled Ceylon and Mauritius, for example, legal protections against elite interests helped create vibrant communities of small
landholders, and these communities formed movements that successfully
pressured state officials to extend social welfare policy during the late
colonial and postcolonial periods (de Silva 1997; Jeffries 1962; Lange 2003;
Nyrop et al. 1971). In colonial India and sub-Saharan Africa, however,
peasants did not have access to impartial legal institutions, and the predominance of hierarchical and dependent relationships created an environment antithetical to social mobilization (Mamdani 1996; Migdal 1988).
Subordinate groups were therefore unable to form movements in support
of their well-being.
Colonial legacies of ethnoracial discrimination and exploitation had
their own crucial effects on social development for all types of British
colonies. Social stratification systems and labor-coercive institutions installed by British colonizers contributed to enduring ethnoracial polarization. In particular, they prevented large groups from being able to participate in productive economic opportunities, stifled the formation of
labor associations, and often fueled violent ethnic-based conflict (Beckford
1983; Marx 1998). Indeed, even in the presence of economic prosperity,
staunch ethnoracial cleavages made it nearly impossible for countries to
achieve high national levels of literacy, life expectancy, and education
(Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly 1999; Filmer and Pritchett 1999; McGuire
2001).
In the American South, British colonists pursued labor-intensive agriculture and justified the enslavement of black people on the basis of
racial ideologies (Marx 1998). In Australia, racist policies deprived Aborigines of their tribal lands and excluded them from legally encoded
rights (Denoon and Mein-Smith 2000; Spillman 1996). Ever since, AfricanAmericans and Aborigines have performed poorly on social development
indicators. In plantation colonies, the institutional legacies of slavery
caused the racialization of nearly all social institutions. The importation
of hundreds of thousands of South Asian indentured workers and colonial
policies designed to separate them from either former slaves or indigenous
inhabitants through a race-based, divide-and-rule strategy promoted ethnic conflict in Fiji, Guyana, and Sri Lanka. In South Africa, British
colonizers pioneered spatial segregation between blacks and whites; intrawhite conflict between the British and the Dutch further entrenched
ideas about white superiority in institutions and culture, paving the way
for the implementation of apartheid (Marx 1998).
1446

-

Colonialism and Development
The colonies with low levels of colonial influence were also afflicted by
ethnoracial conflict. In colonial India, British institutions reinforced distinctions based on caste and religion. For instance, the Indian army carefully segregated on the basis of religion and caste membership (Bayly
1988; Metcalf and Metcalf 2002). Such policies promoted social inequalities and increased sectarian conflict, the latter of which led to millions
of deaths during the partition of India and Pakistan. In Myanmar, the
British pitted the Burmese against the minority ethnic groups in order to
control the territory more easily, a policy that created distinct institutions
in both areas and set the stage for the country’s postcolonial civil war
(Smith 1999). A similar ethnically bifurcated form of rule in the Sudan—
dividing the Muslim north from the Christian and Animist south—likewise promoted extreme violence and human misery (Morrison 1971;
Woodward 1990).
Even when not inciting conflict through a divide-and-rule strategy, low
levels of British colonialism polarized society through the construction of
politicized ethnoracial identities and patron-client systems (Laitin 1986;
Stoler and Cooper 1997; Vail 1989). Throughout sub-Saharan Africa, for
example, the colonial administration channeled resources through the
chiefs, who in turn passed them on to key supporters in order to maintain
their positions. These patron-client relations generated politicized ethnoracial identities because common cultural heritage was the main source
of chiefdom legitimacy and because the provisioning of communal goods
to local subjects—especially land—tied one’s ethnoracial identity to material payoffs (Mamdani 1996). Moreover, given scarce resources and competition over the postcolonial state, the chiefs and other political entrepreneurs often appealed to ethnicity for support and mobilization, thereby
embedding the postcolonial state in a polarized civil society.
Thus, social development in former British colonies has been shaped
by colonial legacies in three primary ways: economic performance, state
and societal capacities to promote social welfare development, and ethnoracial polarization. While the first two were positively related to the
intensity of British colonialism, the third afflicted a number of British
colonies regardless of the level of colonial influence. More intensive British
colonialism was therefore better for social development in general, although ethnoracial stratification propelled by the colonizers often contributed to pervasive social inequalities and violence in a wide variety of
former British colonies, with ultimately harmful consequences for social
development.

1447

-

American Journal of Sociology
Postcolonial Development Trajectories
Finally, to return to the overall comparison, simple descriptive statistics
can be used to illustrate the differing effects of levels of Spanish and
British colonialism on long-run development. In table 4, we compare our
estimates of levels of colonialism and precolonial development to a statistical indicator of postcolonial development derived from the Human
Development Index (HDI). The HDI measures national development by
aggregating data on life expectancy at birth, adult literacy, gross primary
school enrollment ratios, and GDP per capita (United Nations 2002). For
illustrative purposes, we focus on only two points in time—1975 and
2000—though our findings apply to any two periods for which HDI data
are available.15
We first assess the correlation between level of colonialism and HDI.
For the Spanish colonies, the coefficients are ⫺.59 and ⫺.48 for HDI 1975
and HDI 2000, respectively. The outliers are peripheral Spanish colonies
that did not experience substantial development, especially Nicaragua and
Paraguay. In addition, Mexico performed above average despite the fact
that it was a central colony. These cases lead the relationship to be less
than perfect, but even when they are included, level of colonialism remains
clearly and negatively associated with postcolonial development. Conversely, for the British colonies, level of colonialism is positively associated
with postcolonial development, and the correlations are very strong: .86
and .88 for HDI 1975 and 2000, respectively.
Next, we correlate precolonial and postcolonial levels of development.
Consistent with the argument that colonialism caused a great reversal in
all regions, we find that our ordinal estimate of precolonial development
is negatively related to the HDI indices. For the Spanish colonies, the
precolonial/postcolonial coefficients are ⫺.63 for HDI 1975 and ⫺.58 for
HDI 2000. For the British colonies, the precolonial/postcolonial coefficients are ⫺.61 and ⫺.41, respectively. Though these numerical data by
themselves can hardly make the case for our theory of colonialism, they
do provide additional support on top of our comparative-historical analysis of particular cases.

CONCLUDING DISCUSSION

This analysis speaks to one of the fundamental questions of macrosociology: What explains differences in levels of development in the nonEuropean world? We follow recent work in arguing that colonialism was
15
The correlation between HDI 1975 and HDI 2000 is .96 for the Spanish colonies
and .93 for the British colonies.

1448

-

TABLE 4
Trajectories of Development: Spanish and British Colonies

Country

Spanish colonies:
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bolivia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cuba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dominican Republic . . .
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
El Salvador . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nicaragua . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Paraguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
British colonies:
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bahamas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Barbados . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Belize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brunei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cyprus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Fiji . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hong Kong . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lesotho . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malawi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Myanmar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Level of
Precolonial
Development

Level of
Colonialism

Low
High
Low
Intermediate
Low
Low
Low
High
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
Low
Low
High
Low
Intermediate

Low
High
Low
Intermediate
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
High
Intermediate
High
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
Intermediate

Low
Low
High
Low
Low
Intermediate
High
Low
High
High
Intermediate
Intermediate
High
Low
High
High
Low
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
High
Low
High

High
Intermediate
Low-intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
Intermediate
High
Intermediate-high
Low-intermediate
Low-intermediate
Low
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate-high
Low-intermediate
Intermediate
Low-intermediate
Low
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low-intermediate
High
Low

-

HDI (1975)

HDI (2000)

.79
.51
.70
.66
.75

.84
.65
.83
.77
.82
.80
.73
.73
.71
.63
.64
.80
.64
.79
.74
.75
.83
.77

.62
.62
.59
.51
.52
.69
.57
.71
.67
.64
.76
.72
.84
.34

.49
.87
.44
.66
.27
.44
.68
.76
.41
.69
.44
.48
.32
.62
.63
.85
.33

.94
.83
.48
.87
.78
.57
.86
.94
.88
.64
.76
.41
.55
.71
.89
.58
.74
.51
.54
.40
.78
.77
.55
.92
.46

American Journal of Sociology
TABLE 4 (Continued)

Country

Level of
Precolonial
Development

Level of
Colonialism

Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Solomon Islands . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sri Lanka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sudan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Swaziland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Trinidad/Tobago . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States . . . . . . . . . . .
Zambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Zimbabwe . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

High
Intermediate
Low
Low
Intermediate
High
High
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
High
Low
Intermediate
High

Low-intermediate
Low
Intermediate-high
Low
Intermediate-high
Intermediate
Low
Low
Low
Intermediate
Low
High
Low
Low-intermediate

HDI (1975)

HDI (2000)

.35

.50
.28
.89
.62
.70
.74
.50
.58
.44
.81
.44
.94
.43
.55

.72
.65
.62
.35
.51
.72
.86
.45
.55

Note.—Human Development Index (HDI) scores are from United Nations (2002). Level of precolonial
development and level of colonialism are from tables 2 and 3 above.

of decisive importance, triggering a reversal of fortunes in which more
economically developed precolonial territories became less developed, and
less economically developed areas became more developed. However,
whereas the recent literature emphasizes domestic conditions in the colonies and insists that “it is not the identity of the colonizer . . . that
matters” (Acemoglu et al. 2001, p. 1373; see also Robinson and Sokoloff
2003, p. 174), we argue that one must simultaneously pay attention to
conditions in precolonial territories and the identity of the colonizer to
understand adequately how colonialism shaped long-run development.
Our argument specifically shows that the historical processes through
which colonial institutions were installed and shaped subsequent development differed dramatically for Spanish and British colonialism (see fig.
2). Spain colonized most heavily precolonial regions that were prosperous
because these areas offered the greatest potential for accumulation under
a mercantilist economic model. By contrast, Britain colonized most heavily precolonial regions that were less complex because these areas offered
the greatest potential for capitalist accumulation. In turn, areas that were
heavily colonized by Spain saw the introduction of substantial mercantilist
institutions, and these institutions became important impediments to postcolonial development. Areas that were heavily colonized by Britain saw
the introduction of substantial liberal institutions, and these institutions
were positively associated with development. Hence, both Spanish and
British colonialism reversed the fortunes of precolonial regions, but they
did so in very different ways.
1450

-

Fig. 2.—Elaborated model of colonialism and development

-

American Journal of Sociology
The theory of colonialism that informs this argument—rooted in the
distinction between mercantilist and liberal colonizers—offers new insights into debates about colonialism. Concerning the onset of colonialism,
the theory sheds light on the relative importance of three sets of domestic
conditions: population size, disease environment, and natural resource
endowment. For population size, we show that mercantilist colonizers
preferred to settle highly populated areas because of their substantial labor
pools, whereas liberal colonizers avoided settlement in densely settled
areas because the radical displacement of the indigenous population was
seen as too costly. Our finding is inconsistent with the work of Acemoglu
et al. (2001, 2002), who assume that population size is negatively associated
with colonial settlement across all European occupiers. However, it is
consistent with previous qualitative comparative work on colonialism
(e.g., Fieldhouse 1966).
In terms of disease environment, our evidence does not challenge the
basic insight that all colonial powers ceteris paribus preferred to inhabit
low-mortality environments. However, we show that this basic preference
could easily be outweighed by other strategic calculations. Mercantilist
Spain permanently settled in areas with high mortality rates because mineral wealth was located there, and even the British initially were drawn
to high-mortality plantation colonies in the New World (Engerman and
Sokoloff 2002, p. 51). Hence, we caution against asserting that disease
environment was a critical factor influencing settlement patterns before
liberalism as an economic model had fully taken hold. Instead, in the
mercantilist era of colonialism, disease environment was a relatively minor
consideration.
As for natural resource endowments, the presence of precious metals
was decisive in fostering heavy mercantilist occupation, as can be seen
by Spanish settlement in Mexico and the Andes. Beyond this, somewhat
higher levels of Spanish colonialism were also found in areas with climates
and soils that allowed for specialization in a profitable export crop, such
as sugar in the Caribbean. British colonialists similarly showed at least
some preference for areas where precious metals were located (e.g., South
Africa), ecological conditions allowed for profitable agriculture (e.g., the
West Indies), or preexisting markets made possible profitable trade (e.g.,
Hong Kong). However, the most important British settlement colonies
had soils and climates favorable not to export agriculture but rather to
small-scale independent farms. These conditions were exactly what mercantilist Spain avoided. Hence, Engerman and Sokoloff (2002) are correct
to highlight the importance of climate and soils for settlement patterns,
but they do not provide a framework for understanding how these factors
differentially influenced settlement across mercantilist and liberal powers.
Our analysis also offers new perspectives on the role of colonial insti1452

-

Colonialism and Development
tutions in promoting development and underdevelopment. The literature
on the colonial reversal largely treats these institutions as a “black box,”
though it strongly speculates about the importance of property rights
(Acemoglu et al. 2002; Acemoglu 2002). Our analysis differs in its emphasis. For one thing, we put greater weight with colonial state institutions, especially those promoting the rule of law in the British colonies.
We stress that the extent of colonial bureaucracy often drove the extent
of property rights, and thus that the state rather than the market was the
central mechanism linking British colonialism with development. As for
the Spanish colonies, the issue was not so much the degree to which
property rights were established, but rather the extent to which the colonial state had created actors and institutions that impeded the postcolonial creation of capitalist property rights. In some cases, the Spanish
presence was marginal enough that postcolonial actors were able to build
capitalist institutions without having to overcome entrenched mercantilist
obstructions.
We find broad support for Engerman and Sokoloff’s (2002) argument
that colonial institutions fostering inequality had detrimental effects for
long-run development. Likewise, we believe that Acemoglu et al.’s (2001)
concern with the long-run damaging effects of extractive colonial institutions is well founded. However, we emphasize the different kinds of
extractive and inequality-enhancing institutions that the Spanish and British established. Spanish extractive institutions, such as coercive labor
systems, required a substantial colonial presence. By contrast, British
extractive institutions, such as marketing boards, were generally implemented in conjunction with indirect colonialism and required only a limited colonial presence. Hence, we find it useful to distinguish the extractive
institutions that accompanied colonialism by a mercantilist power and
those that accompanied colonialism by a liberal power.
Our analysis of colonial legacies also varies from the recent work of
economists in its emphasis on specifically ethnoracial stratification, which
not only produces psychological hardship among subordinate groups, but
also affects their access to markets, health, and educational opportunities.
For the Spanish-American colonies, we view colonial exploitation of the
indigenous population as a leading reason why countries with a dense
indigenous population have long been the region’s worst performers in
the area of social development, whereas those without such a population
have long been the region’s most successful at achieving social development. For the British colonies, ethnoracial systems were also a decisive
factor affecting social development. In the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, conquered peoples were uprooted and marginalized, but the remaining indigenous populations were usually so small
that macrolevel statistics on social development do not capture this history
1453

-

American Journal of Sociology
of oppression. South Africa and Zimbabwe, on the other hand, had much
larger indigenous populations. As a result, the effects are evident in aggregate data, and ethnoracial conflict has been widespread. In former
plantation colonies, capital and labor were divided along racial lines, with
Europeans owning and Africans and Asians working, causing these societies to be racially stratified and to experience long-term differentials in
individual well-being based on the color of one’s skin. In addition, the
introduction of South Asian indentured workers in several plantation
colonies almost always caused strife with either the indigenous population
or with former slaves, conflict that has severely limited social development
in former colonies such as Guyana, Sri Lanka, and Fiji. As these examples
underscore, ethnoracial stratification and violence often was caused by
British colonialism, affected colonies with diverse levels of colonial influence, and had very negative consequences for development.
More work surely needs to be done in identifying the specific role and
relative weight of different colonial institutions for long-run development.
As this research takes place, however, investigators would be wise to pay
close attention to the identity of the colonial occupier, for different colonial
powers pursued contrasting modes of institutional establishment, with
major implications for postcolonial development.
REFERENCES
Abernethy, David B. 2000. The Dynamics of Global Dominance: European Overseas
Empires, 1415–1980. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Comment.” Economia 3:94–102.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins
of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic
Review 91:1369–1401.
———. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the
Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117:1231–94.
Adamson, Alan. 1972. Sugar without Slaves: The Political Economy of British Guiana,
1838–1904. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Adcock, Robert, and David Collier. 2001. “Measurement Validity: A Shared Standard
for Qualitative and Quantitative Research.” American Political Science Review 95:
529–46.
Adelman, Jeremy. 1994. Frontier Development: Land, Labour, and Capital on the
Wheatlands of Argentina and Canada, 1890–1914. New York: Clarendon.
Ajayi, J. F. Ade, and Michael Crowder. 1971. History of West Africa. London: Longman.
Alam, M. Shahid. 1994. “Colonialism, Decolonisation and Growth Rates: Theory and
Empirical Evidence.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 18:235–57.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1999. “Public Goods and Ethnic
Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:1243–84.
Alpers, Edward A. 1975. Ivory and Slaves: Changing Pattern of International Trade
in East Central Africa to the Later Nineteenth Century. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Andrien, Kenneth J. 1995. The Kingdom of Quito, 1690–1830: The State and Regional
Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1454

-

Colonialism and Development
———. 2001. Andean Worlds: Indigenous History, Culture, and Consciousness under
Spanish Rule, 1532–1825. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Banerjee, Abhijtit, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2005. “History, Institutions and Economic
Performance: The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India.” American
Economic Review 95:1190–1213.
Bates, Robert H. 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Political Basis of
Agricultural Policies. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Bayly, C. A. 1988. The New Cambridge History of India: Indian Society and the
Making of the British Empire. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Beckford, George. 1983. Persistent Poverty: Underdevelopment in Plantation
Economies of the Third World. London: Zed Books.
Bennett, Judith. 1987. Wealth of the Solomons: A History of a Pacific Archipelago,
1800–1978. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Bensel, Richard Franklin. 1990. Yankee Leviathan: The Origins of Central State
Authority in America, 1858–1877. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bernhard, Michael, Christopher Reenock, and Timothy Nordstrom. 2004. “The Legacy
of Western Overseas Colonialism on Democratic Survival.” International Studies
Quarterly 48:225–50.
Bertocchi, Graziella, and Fabio Canova. 2002. “Did Colonization Matter for Growth?
An Empirical Exploration into the Historical Causes of Africa’s Underdevelopment.”
European Economic Review 46:1851–71.
Boone, Catherine. 1994. “States and Ruling Classes in Postcolonial Africa: The
Enduring Contradictions of Power.” Pp. 108–40 in State Power and Social Forces:
Domination and Transformation in the Third World, edited by Joel Migdal, Atul
Kohli, and Vivienne Shue. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bowman, Kirk, Fabrice Lehoucq, and James Mahoney. 2005. “Measuring Political
Democracy: Case Expertise, Data Adequacy, and Central America.” Comparative
Political Studies 8:939–70.
Boyd-Bowman, Peter. 1976. “Patterns of Spanish Emigration to the Indies until 1600.”
Hispanic American Historical Review 56:580–604.
Brading, David A. 1971. Miners and Merchants in Bourbon Mexico, 1763–1810.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
British Colonial Office. 1953. Annual Colonial Report (Gold Coast). London: Her
Majesty’s Stationary Office.
———. 1955. Annual Colonial Report (the Bahamas, Barbados, Basotholand, British
Guiana, British Honduras, Ceyon, Fiji, Gambia, Hong Kong, Jamaica, Kenya,
Malaya, Mauritius, North Borneo, Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Sarawak, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Southern Rhodesia, Swaziland, Tanganyika, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, Zanzibar). London: Her Majesty’s Stationary Office.
———. 1958. Annual Colonial Report (Bechuanaland, the Solomon Islands). London:
Her Majesty’s Stationary Office.
Brown, Ian, and Rajeswary Ampalavanar. 1986. Malaysia. Denver: Clio.
Burkholder, Mark A., and Lyman L. Johnson. 1998. Colonial Latin America. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, Mavis C. 1988. The Maroons of Jamaica, 1655–1796: A History of
Resistance, Collaboration and Betrayal. Granby, Mass.: Bergin and Garvey.
Carrasco, Pedro. 1976. “La sociedad mexicana antes de la conquista.” Pp. 165–288 in
Historia general de México: Tomo I, edited by Daniel Cosı́o Villegas. Mexico City:
El Colegio de México.
Castañeda, Carmen. 1990. “Student Migration to Colonial Urban Centers: Guadalajara
and Lima.” Pp. 128–42 in Migration in Colonial Spanish America, edited by David
J. Robinson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coatsworth, John H. 1993. “Notes on the Comparative Economic History of Latin
America and the United States.” Pp. 264–302 in Development and Underdevelopment

1455

-

American Journal of Sociology
in America: Contrasts of Economic Growth in North and Latin America in Historical
Perspective, edited by Walther L. Bernecker and Hans Werner Tobler. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter.
———. 1998. “Economic and Institutional Trajectories in Nineteenth-Century Latin
America.” Pp. 23–54 in Latin American and the World Economy since 1800, edited
by John H. Coatsworth and Alan M. Taylor. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University,
David Rockefeller Center for Latin America Studies.
Cole, Jeffrey A. 1985. The Potosi Mita, 1573–1700: Compulsory Labor in the Andes.
Standford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Collins, Robert O., James McDonald Burns, and Erik Kristofer Ching, eds. 1994.
Historical Problems of Imperial Africa. Princeton, N.J.: Markus Wiener.
Cook, Edward M. 1976. The Fathers of the Towns: Leadership and Community
Structure in Eighteenth-Century New England. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Cotler, Julio. 1978. Clases, estado y nación en el Perú. Lima: Instituto de Estudios
Peruanos.
Crowder, Michael. 1968. West Africa under Colonial Rule. London: Hutchinson.
Curtin, Philip. 1969. The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
D’Altroy, Terence N. 2002. The Incas. Oxford: Blackwell.
Denevan, William M. 1992. “Native American Populations in 1492: Recent Research
and a Revised Hemispheric Estimate.” Pp. xvii–xxix in The Native Population of
the Americas, 2d ed., edited by William M. Denevan. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
Denoon, Donald. 1983. Settler Capitalism. Oxford: Clarendon.
Denoon, Donald, and Philippa Mein-Smith. 2000. A History of Australia, New Zealand,
and the Pacific. Oxford: Blackwell.
de Silva, Chandra Richard. 1997. Sri Lanka: A History. New Delhi: Vikas.
Drèze, Jean, and Amartya Sen. 1989. Hunger and Public Action. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Edwardes, Michael. 1967. British India, 1772–1947: A Survey of the Nature and Effects
of Alien Rule. London: Sidgwick and Jackson.
Ekelund, Robert B., and Robert D. Tollison. 1981. Mercantilism as a Rent-Seeking
Society: Economic Regulation in Historical Perspective. College Station: Texas A&M
University Press.
Emerson, Rupert. 1937. Malaysia: A Study of Direct and Indirect Rule. New York:
Macmillan.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “Factor Endowments,
Inequality, and Paths of Development among New World Economies.” Economia
3:41–88.
Evans, Peter B. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Fage, J. D. 2002. A History of Africa, 4th ed. New York: Routledge.
Ferguson, Niall. 2002. Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and
the Lessons for Global Power. New York: Basic Books.
Ferleger, Louis. 1985. “Capital Goods and Southern Economic Development.” Journal
of Economic History 45:411–17.
Fieldhouse, D. K. 1966. The Colonial Empires: A Comparative Survey from the
Eighteenth Century. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Filmer, Deon, and Lant Pritchett. 1999. “The Impact of Public Spending on Health:
Does Money Matter?” Social Science and Medicine 49:1309–23.
Fisher, John. 1985. Commercial Relations between Spain and Spanish America in the
Era of Free Trade, 1778–1796. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.

1456

-

Colonialism and Development
Fisher, Michael. 1991. Indirect Rule in India: Residents and the Residency System.
Dehli: Oxford University Press.
Florescano, Enrique. 1975. Haciendas, latifundios y plantaciones en América Latina.
Mexico City: Siglo Veintiuno.
Frank, Andre Gunder. 1972. Lumpenbourgeoisie/Lumpendevelopment: Dependence,
Class, and Politics in Latin America. New York: Monthly Review.
Galenson, David W. 1996. “The Settlement and Growth of the Colonies: Population,
Labor, and Economic Development.” Pp. 135–207 in The Cambridge Economic
History of the United States, edited by Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goldsworthy, David. 1971. Colonial Issues in British Politics, 1945–1961: From
‘Colonial Development’ to ‘Winds of Change.’ Oxford: Clarendon.
Gopal, Ram. 1963. British Rule in India: An Assessment. New York: Asia.
Gorman, G. E., and J. J. Mills. 1994. Fiji. Denver: Clio.
Grier, Robin M. 1999. “Colonial Legacies and Economic Growth.” Public Choice 98:
317–35.
Guardino, Peter, and Charles Walker. 1992. “State, Society, and Politics in Peru and
Mexico in the Late Colonial and Early Republican Periods.” Latin American
Perspectives 19:10–43.
Haber, Stephen. 1991. “Industrial Concentration and the Capital Markets: A
Comparative Study of Brazil, Mexico, and the United States, 1830–1930.” Journal
of Economic History 51:559–80.
———. 1997. “Financial Markets and Industrial Development: A Comparative Study
of Government Regulation, Financial Innovation, and Industrial Structure in Brazil
and Mexico, 1840–1930.” Pp. 146–78 in How Latin America Fell Behind: Essays on
the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800–1914, edited by Stephen Haber.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Halperı́n Donghi, Tulio. 1985. Reforma y disolución de los imperios ibéricos,
1750–1850. Madrid: Alianza Editorial.
———. 1993. The Contemporary History of Latin America. Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.
Hansen, Roger D. 1971. The Politics of Mexican Development. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Haring, C. H. 1947. The Spanish Empire in America. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Harper, T. A. 1999. The End of Empire and the Making of Malaya. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hechter, Michael. 1975. Internal Colonialism: The Celtic Fringe in British National
Development, 1536–1966. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Heckscher, Eli F. 1935. Mercantilism. 2 vols. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Heller, Patrick. 1999. The Labor of Development: Workers and the Transformation of
Capitalism in Kerala, India. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Herbst, Jeffrey. 2000. States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority
and Control. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Heussler, Robert. 1981. British Rule in Malaya: The Malayan Civil Service and Its
Predecessors, 1867–1942. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood.
Hoberman, Louisa Schell, and Susan Migden Socolow, eds. 1986. Cities and Society
in Colonial Latin America. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Horwitz, Morton. 1977. The Transformation of American Law, 1780–1860. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Huff, W. G. 1994. The Economic Growth of Singapore: Trade and Development in the
Twentieth Century. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hurwitz, Samuel J., and Edith Hurwitz. 1971. Jamaica: A Historical Portrait. New
York: Praeger.

1457

-

American Journal of Sociology
Ibrahim, H. A. 1985. “African Initiatives and Resistance in North-East Africa.” Pp.
63–86 in General History Africa, vol. 7: Africa under Colonial Domination,
1880–1935, edited by A. Adu Boahen. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Jacobsen, Nils, and Hans-Jürgen Puhle, eds. 1986. The Economies of Mexico and Peru
during the Late Colonial Period, 1760–1810. Berlin: Colloquium Verlag.
Jeffries, Charles. 1962. Ceylon: The Path to Independence. London: Pall Mall.
Jomo K. S., ed. 1993. Industrializing Malaysia: Policy, Performance, Prospects. New
York: Routledge.
July, Robert W. 1998. A History of the African People. 5th ed. Prospect Heights, Ill.:
Waveland.
Kaniki, M. H. Y. 1985. “The Colonial Economy: The Former British Zones.” Pp.
382–419 in General History Africa, vol. 7: Africa under Colonial Domination,
1880–1935, edited by A. Adu Boahen. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Kicza, John E. 1983. Colonial Entrepreneurs, Families and Business in Bourbon
Mexico City. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Knight, Alan. 2001. “Democratic and Revolutionary Traditions in Latin America.”
Bulletin of Latin American Research 20:147–86.
Knöbl, Wolfgang. 1998. Polizei und Herrschaft im Modernisierungsprozess:
Staatsbildung und innere Sicherheit in Preussen, England und Amerika 1700–1914.
Frankfurt am Main: Campus Verlag.
Kohli, Atul. 2004. State-Directed Development: Political Power and Industrialization
in the Global Periphery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kuczynski, Robert. 1939. Colonial Population. London: Oxford University Press.
———. 1948. Demographic Survey of the British Colonial Empire. Vol. 1. New York:
Oxford University Press.
———. 1949. Demographic Survey of the British Colonial Empire. Vol. 2. New York:
Oxford University Press.
———. 1953. Demographic Survey of the British Colonial Empire. Vol. 3. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kulkarni, V. B. 1964. British Dominion in India and After. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya
Bhavan.
Kulke, Hermann, and Dietmar Rothermund. 1998. A History of India. New York:
Routledge.
Kumar, Anand. 1989. State and Society in India: A Study of the State’s AgendaMaking, 1917–1977. New Dehli: Radiant.
Kumar, Dharma. 1998. Colonialism, Property and the State. Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Laitin, David. 1986. Hegemony and Culture: Politics and Religious Change among the
Yoruba. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. New York: W.W. Norton.
Lang, James. 1975. Conquest and Commerce: Spain and England in the Americas.
New York: Academic Press.
Lange, Matthew. 2003. “Embedding the Colonial State: A Comparative-Historical
Analysis of State Building and Broad-Based Development in Mauritius.” Social
Science History 27:397–423.
———. 2004. “The British Colonial Lineages of Despotism and Development.” Ph.D.
dissertation. Brown University, Department of Sociology.
———. 2005. “The Rule of Law and Development: A Weberian Framework of States
and State-Society Relations.” Pp. 48–65 in States and Development: Historical
Antecedents of Stagnation and Advance, edited by Matthew Lange and Dietrich
Rueschemeyer. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.

1458

-

Colonialism and Development
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.
1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106:1113–55.
———. 1999. “The Quality of Government.” Journal of Economics, Law and
Organization 15:222–79.
Larraz López, José. 1963. La época del mercantilismo en Castilla, 1500–1700. Madrid:
Aguilar.
Lee, J. M. 1967. Colonial Development and Good Government: A Study of the Ideas
Expressed by the British Official Classes in Planning Decolonization, 1939–1964.
Oxford: Clarendon.
LePoer, Barbara Leitch, ed. 1991. Singapore: A Country Study. Washington, D.C.:
Library of Congress.
Lewis, Gordon K. 1968. The Growth of the Modern West Indies. New York: Monthly
Review.
Lockhart, James, and Stuart B. Schwartz. 1983. Early Latin America: A History of
Colonial Spanish America and Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lynch, John. 1958. Spanish Colonial Administration, 1782–1810. New York:
Greenwood.
MacLeod, Murdo J. 1984. “Aspects of the Internal Economy.” Pp. 315–60 in The
Cambridge History of Latin America, edited by Leslie Bethell. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mahoney, James. 2003. “Long-Run Development and the Legacy of Colonialism in
Spanish America.” American Journal of Sociology 109:50–106.
Mahoney, James, and Matthias vom Hau. 2003. “Indigenous People, Colonialism, and
Social Development in Spanish America.” Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the American Sociological Association, Atlanta, August.
Mamdani, Mahmood. 1996. Citizen and Subject: Decentralized Despotism and the
Legacy of Late Colonialism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Mandle, Jay. 1974. “The Plantation States as a Sub-region of the Post-bellum South.”
Journal of Economic History 34:732–38.
Marshall, P. J. 1968. Problems of Empire: Britain and India 1757–1813. New York:
Barnes & Noble.
Marx, Anthony W. 1998. Making Race and Nation: A Comparison of the United States,
South Africa, and Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Masani, R. P. 1960. British in India. London: Oxford University Press.
McEvedy, Colin, and Richard Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. New
York: Facts on File.
McGuire, James W. 2001. “Social Policy and Mortality Decline in East Asia and Latin
America.” World Development 29:1673–97.
McKinley, P. Michael. 1985. Pre-revolutionary Caracas: Politics, Economy, and Society,
1777–1811. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mendez, Juan, Guillermo O’Donnell, and Paul Pinheiro, eds. 1999. The (Un)Rule of
Law and the Underprivileged in Latin America. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of
Notre Dame Press.
Metcalf, Barbara D., and Thomas R. Metcalf. 2002. A Concise History of India.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Meyer, David. 2000. Hong Kong as a Global Metropolis. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Migdal, Joel. 1988. Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and
State Capabilities in the Third World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Miles, William. 1994. Hausaland Divided: Colonialism and Independence in Nigeria
and Niger. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Mörner, Magnus. 1976. “Spanish Migration to the New World prior to 1810: A Report
on the State of Research.” Pp. 737–804 in First Images of America: The Impact of

1459

-

American Journal of Sociology
New World on the Old, edited by Fredi Chiapelli. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
———. 1985. The Andean Past: Land, Societies and Conflicts. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Morrison, Godfrey. 1971. The Southern Sudan and Eritrea: Aspects of Wider African
Problems. London: Minority Rights Group.
Newson, Linda A. 1976. Aboriginal and Spanish Colonial Trinidad: A Study in Cultural
Contact. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1985. “Indian Population Patterns in Colonial Spanish America.” Latin
American Research Review 20:41–74.
Ngo, Tak-Wing, ed. 1999. Hong Kong’s History: State and Society under Colonial
Rule. New York: Routledge.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
Performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.
North, Douglass C., and Robert P. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A
New Economic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nyrop, Richard, Beryl Benderly, Ann Cort, Newton Parker, James Perlmutter, RinnSup Shinn, and Mary Shivanandan. 1971. Area Handbook for Ceylon. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Oliver, Roland Anthony. 1999. The African Experience: From Olduvai Gorge to the
21st Century. Boulder: Westview.
Oliver, Roland Anthony, and Anthony Atmore. 2005. Africa since 1800. 5th ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pagden, Anthony. 1995. Lords of All the World: Ideologies of Empire in Spain, Britain
and France, c. 1500–c. 1800. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Palmer, David Scott. 1977. “The Politics of Authoritarianism in Spanish America.” Pp.
377–412 in Authoritarianism and Corporatism in Latin America, edited by James
M. Malloy. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
———. 1980. Peru: The Authoritarian Tradition. New York: Praeger.
Pérez, Louis A. 1988. Cuba: Between Reform and Revolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pike, Douglas. 1970. Australia: The Quiet Continent. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry A. Patrinos. 1994. “Indigenous People and Poverty
in Latin America.” Finance and Development 31:41–43.
Ragin, Charles C. 2000. Fuzzy-Set Social Science. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Roberts, Elfred, Sum Ngai Ling, and Peter Bradshaw. 1992. Historical Dictionary of
Hong Kong and Macau. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow.
Robinson, James, and Kenneth Sokoloff. 2003. “Historical Roots of Inequality in Latin
America and the Caribbean.” Pp. 191–228 in Inequality in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Breaking with History? edited by David de Ferranti et al. Washington,
D.C.: World Bank.
Robinson, Ronald. 1972. “Non-European Foundations of European Imperialism:
Sketch for a Theory of Collaboration.” Pp. 117–40 in Studies in the Theory of
Imperialism, edited by Roger Owen and Bob Sutcliffe. London: Longman.
Rock, David. 1987. Argentina, 1516–1987: From Spanish Colonization to Alfonsı́n.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Rodney, Walter. 1982. How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Revised ed. Washington,
D.C.: Howard University Press.
Roemer, John E. 1982. “New Directions in the Marxist Theory of Exploitation and
Class.” Politics and Society 11:253–87.
Rostworowski, Maria. 1988. Historia del Tahuantinsuyu. Lima: Instituto de Estudios
Peruanos.
Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, and Peter B. Evans. 1985. “The State and Economic

1460

-

Colonialism and Development
Transformation: Toward an Analysis of the Conditions Underlying Effective
Intervention.” Pp. 44–77 in Bringing the State Back In, edited by Peter B. Evans,
Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Ryan, N. J. 1976. A History of Malaysia and Singapore. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Safford, Frank. 1985. “Politics, Ideology and Society in Post-independence Spanish
America.” Pp. 347–422 in The Cambridge History of Latin America, vol. 3: From
Independence to c. 1870. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sánchez-Albornoz, Nicolás. 1974. The Population of Latin America: A History.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Sanders, Elizabeth. 1999. Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers, and the American State,
1877–1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Adam. (1776) 2000. The Wealth of Nations. New York: Modern Library.
Smith, Martin. 1999. Burma: Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity. New York: Zed
Books.
Smith, Michael E. 1996. The Aztecs. Oxford: Blackwell.
Socolow, Susan Migden. 1996. “Introduction to the Rural Past.” Pp. 3–18 in The
Countryside in Colonial Latin America, edited by Louisa Schell Hoberman and
Susan Migden Socolow. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Solberg, Carl E. 1987. The Prairies and the Pampas: Agrarian Policy in Canada and
Argentina, 1880–1930. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Spalding, Karen. 1970. “Social Climbers: Changing Patterns of Mobility among Indians
of Colonial Peru.” Hispanic American Historical Review 50:645–64.
Spillman, Lyn. 1996. “‘Neither the Same Nation nor Different Nations’: Constitutional
Conventions in the United States and Australia.” Comparative Studies in Society
and History 38:149–81.
Steckel, Richard H., and Jerome C. Rose. 2002. “Patterns of Health in the Western
Hemisphere.” Pp. 563–79 in The Backbone of History: Health and Nutrition in the
Western Hemisphere, edited by Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Stern, Steve J. 1993. Peru’s Indian Peoples and the Challenge of Spanish Conquest:
Hamanga to 1640. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Stokes, Eric. 1973. “The First Century of British Colonial Rule in India: Social
Revolution or Social Stagnation?” Past and Present 58:136–60.
Stoler, Ann, and Frederick Cooper. 1997. “Between Metropole and Colony: Rethinking
a Research Agenda.” Pp. 1–58 in Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures in a
Bourgeois World, edited by Frederick Cooper and Ann Stoler. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
Townsend, Richard F. 2001. The Aztecs. New York: Thames & Hudson.
United Nations. 2002. Human Development Report. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Vail, LeRoy, ed. 1989. The Creation of Tribalism in Southern Africa. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
Vicens Vives, Jaime. 1969. An Economic History of Spain. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Walker, Geoffrey J. 1979. Spanish Politics and Imperial Trade, 1700–1789.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1974. “The Rise and Future Demise of the World Capitalist
System: Concepts for Comparative Analysis.” Comparative Studies in Society and
History 16:387–415.
Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology, edited
by Guenther Ross and Claus Wittich. Berkeley: University of California Press.

1461

-

American Journal of Sociology
Whigham, Thomas. 1991. The Politics of River Trade: Tradition and Development in
the Upper Plata, 1780–1870. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Wolf, Eric R. 1982. Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Wolff, Richard D. 1974. The Economics of Colonialism: Britain and Kenya, 1870–1930.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Woodward, Peter. 1990. Sudan, 1898–1989: The Unstable State. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne
Rienner.
Wright, Erik Olin. 1997. Class Counts: Comparative Studies in Class Analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wrigley, Christopher. 1996. Kingship and State: The Buganda Dynasty. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Young, Allen. 1958. The Approaches of Local Self-Government in British Guiana.
London: Longmans, Green.
Young, Crawford. 1994. The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective. New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Zawawi Ibrahim. 1998. The Malay Labourer: By the Window of Capitalism. Singapore:
Stamford.
Zulawski, Ann. 1990. “Frontier Workers and Social Change.” Pp. 112–27 in Migration
in Colonial Spanish America, edited by David J. Robinson. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

1462

-

