Chapter Title: The Capitalist Era
Book Title: Capitalism
Book Subtitle: A Short History
Book Author(s): Jürgen Kocka
Published by: Princeton University Press



The Capitalist Era

Just as unlikely as it was that the Age of Enlightenment’s
optimism about progress could be sustained, equally slim
were the chances that interpreting capitalism as the core
of a civilizing mission might outlast that era. This buoyant
interpretation sprang from the soil of preindustrial capi-
talism but did not survive the rise of industrial capitalism
in the nineteenth century. At the beginning of the twenti-
eth century, intellectuals like Werner Sombart and Max
Weber were indeed convinced of capitalism’s superior eco-
nomic rationality, but they did not see it as a driving force
behind moral advancement and progress in civilization.
On the contrary, liberals like Weber feared the capital-
ist system’s growing tendency to become compulsive and
meaningless, and that the system might be imperiling
freedom, spontaneity, and humanity in the fullest sense.
Conservatives and leftists alike feared capitalism as an un-
stoppable erosive force replacing traditional morals with
contracts, community with society, and social ties with
market calculation. The socialist critique castigated exploi-
tation, alienation, and injustice in capitalism while pre-
dicting its collapse from internal contradictions. Today
attitudes toward capitalism fluctuate between acceptance
and severe criticism. Many regard it as unfit to meet the


96

chapter 4

challenges of the future. The idea of capitalism as a utopia
appears obsolete, at least in Europe. One aim of this chap-
ter is to understand this reversal and provide perspectives
for its assessment.
the contours of Industrialization and
Globalization since 1800
To be sure, developments that had started in the preceding
centuries continued, to some extent, between 1800 und
2000. Agrarian capitalism conquered new regions as the
feudal order was eliminated step by step, which happened
almost everywhere on the European continent during the
nineteenth century. In the twentieth century, agrarian
capitalism grew into “agribusiness” on a global scale. With
growing urbanization and innovations that revolutionized
commerce, transportation, and communications, merchant
capitalism gained enormously in importance during the
nineteenth and twentieth century; the dynamic growth of
mass consumption, especially in the twentieth century,
opened up new and highly profitable opportunities that
changed the lives of many, from department and discount
stores to the great retail concerns and chains of the pres-
ent. Little could be accomplished without finance capitalism, already established by the eighteenth century but now
expanding and increasingly differentiated, initially with
banks, stock exchanges, and insurance companies as the
most important institutions, later with investment com-
panies and mutual funds; in the late twentieth and early
twenty-first centuries, finance capitalism underwent an ex-
orbitant expansion, without which the international fi-
nancial and economic crisis of 2008 would presumably
have been avoided. But what was truly revolutionary and
novel after 1800 was industrialization, a process that, among
other things, profoundly altered capitalism. As industrial
capitalism, it took on a new quality.
Industrialization refers to a complex and far-reaching so-
cioeconomic transformation process at the core of which
stood three interlocking developments: first of all, innova-
tions in technology and organization, from the develop-
ment of the steam engine and mechanization of spinning
and weaving in the eighteenth century to the digitaliza-
tion of production and communications in the late twen-
tieth and early twenty-first centuries; second, the massive
exploitation of new energy sources (initially coal, later elec-
tricity from different sources, then oil, atomic energy, and
renewable energies) that has fundamentally changed and
endangered the relationship of humankind to nature;
third, the spread of the factory as a manufacturing plant
that, in contrast to the old putting-out system, was central-
ized, and in contrast to a craft workshop, used motors and
machine tools and made a clear distinction between man-
agement and execution. The site of this ever-accelerating
innovation process was, first of all, the sphere of indus-
trial production, yet it soon also influenced agriculture
(new cultivation methods, fertilization, mechanization)
and transportation (application of new forms of energy
and machines in new types of locomotion, from the rail-
road and steamship to air traffic and today’s interdepen-
dent transportation systems), communications (from the
mid-nineteenth century telegraphs to the Internet and new
media), and with some delay also different administrative
services, which soon grew disproportionately within an
overall division of labor that was becoming more differen-
tiated. All this led to an unprecedented increase in the pro-
ductivity of most factors of production, including human
labor, which became increasingly skilled but also more
intense and disciplined. It also led to economic growth,
which proceeded unevenly and fluctuated cyclically yet
remained sustainable, even on a per capita basis and in
spite of a burgeoning population. But most of all it led—
and for the most part this happened after a precarious ini-
tial phase in which scarcity and poverty were aggravated—
to a fundamental improvement of living conditions that
could be seen by looking at real income gains. These im-
provements also showed up in significantly better mate-
rial provisions that allowed the population, including the
broad masses, to share in the progress of health care and
longer lifespans, growing consumption, and a broader va-
riety of everyday choices. Everywhere, industrialization and
urbanization went hand in hand, and everywhere there
was a decline in the share of the population devoted to
agriculture. The agricultural sector now lost first place in
favor of the industrial. In the second half of the twentieth
century, the “tertiary” sector (especially trade and services)
supplanted what had by now become a shrinking indus-
trial sector. That lends a certain plausibility to talk of a “post-
industrial” present, in some regions of the world.
Industrialization initially started to take place in the
second half of the eighteenth century in England, and
then, beginning in the first half or second third of the
nineteenth century, in large parts of the European conti-
nent and North America, with offshoots in eastern and
southern Europe. Japan was the first Asian country to in-
dustrialize, starting in the late nineteenth century. In the
late twentieth century it was followed by large parts of
Asia, especially Southeast Asia, and accelerating in the 1980s
at rapid speed, China. Seldom do entire countries industri-
alize; it was always just individual regions. Depending on
the time of industrialization and on economic, social, po-
litical, and cultural conditions, the processes of industrial-
ization in these different countries and regions varied
greatly from each other. Nowhere was the English model,
and then that of the other early industrializers like the
United States and Germany, simply adopted, no matter
how much all these industrializations influenced each
other by way of reciprocal observation and knowledge
transfers, with strategies of imitation, avoidance, and ad-
aptation. Although one cannot regard industrialization as
the only path to prosperity, the prosperity gap between
industrialized and nonindustrialized regions has grown
enormously over the last two hundred years, both in-
side Europe and worldwide. As a rule, the only way to
have made up in prosperity is some form of industrializa-
tion.1 At core a socioeconomic transformation, industrial-
ization has nonetheless worked its way into almost all
areas of life and dramatically changed the world in a short
amount of time, so that some authors have referred to
industrialization as “the most fundamental transforma-
tion of human life in the history of the world recorded in
written documents” (Hobsbawm) or as the “most impor-
tant break in the history of mankind since the Neolithic
period” (Cipolla.)2 Industrialization has been extremely
well researched. What is its connection to capitalism?
On the one hand, when industrialization began, capital-
ism already had a long history to look back on. Not even in
its proto-industrially expanded form did merchant capital-
ism, which was widespread throughout the world, lead in-
escapably to full-fledged industrialization. There are many
cases illustrating this point. Conversely, the case of the So-
viet Union substantiates how it is also possible for industri-
alization to exist in a noncapitalist form. The concepts of
capitalism and industrialization are defined by different
features, and it is advisable to make a sharp distinction be-
tween the two of them.
On the other hand, preindustrial-commercial traditions
of capitalism, wherever they persisted, significantly pro-
moted the breakthrough to industrialization, wherever that
happened in the nineteenth and twentieth century. In the
nineteenth century, industrialization took place within capi-
talist structures everywhere. Alternative models of a cen-
trally administrated economy were tried out under Com-
munist auspices between 1917 and 1991. They proved to
be inferior.3 China’s rapid industrialization also began to
take off only when the country’s party leadership decided
to loosen political controls step by step and make room
for capitalist principles. There obviously was (and is) a pro-
nounced affinity between capitalism and industrialization:
for both, investments are of decisive importance. An inher-
ent part of industrialization is the permanent search for
new projects, as is constant engagement in new configura-
tions; to this end, pointers and feedback from markets
were and are irreplaceable. A decentralized structure that
disperses decision-making among many different enter-
prises has proven indispensable. So far, any effort at indus-
trialization expecting to be successful over the long run
has presupposed capitalism.


Finally, industrialization changed capitalism:
1. Wage labor on a contractual basis turned into a
mass phenomenon. This meant that, for the first
time, the capitalist commodity form—embodied
in the exchange of labor power for wages—was
applied to human labor fully and en masse. La-
bor relations became capitalistic—that is, depen-
dent on fluctuating labor markets, subjugated to
strict calculation for capitalist purposes, and the
object of direct supervision by the employer and
manager. The class distinction inherent to capi-
talism thus became manifest, taking a tangible
form as a conflict over power and the distribu-
tion of income, and becoming operative as the
basis for social mobilization.
2. With factories, mines, and new transportation
systems, with mechanization and the expansion
of manufacturing plant, the accumulation of
fixed capital reached a scale like nothing before.
Alongside the numerically dominant small and
medium-size businesses, large concerns and
mergers came into being. This brought with it
a rising need for precise control of profitability
and led in principle—with significant qualifica-
tions in reality—to making entrepreneurial
structure more systematic. Planned and hierar-
chical organization based on the division of
labor gained ground as an element of capitalism
along with, and connected to, the principle of
the market.


3. Technological and organizational innovations be-
came incomparably more important than they
had been in preindustrial varieties of capitalism.
There was now a faster pace of innovation. In
Schumpeter’s analysis, “creative destruction” has
been the core component of the capitalist pro-
duction method. In fact, it only got to be this way
when industrial capitalism emerged. Factories re-
placed proto-industrial cottage industry for spin-
ning yarn and weaving cloth. Steamship routes
displaced towpaths and other traditional modes
of transport on rivers and canals. Suppliers of
electric lights quickly triumphed over gaslight
companies. A hundred years later, the manufac-
turers of typewriters lost their market to the pro-
ducers of word-processing computers. To be sure,
such changes opened up new chances of success
and earnings opportunities for enterprising men
and women of business and their employees. As a
rule, consumers profited. At the same time there
were many losers. However, “constant revolution-
izing of production, uninterrupted disturbance of
all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and
agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all
earlier ones.”4 This contributed to the unpopular-
ity of capitalism, and certainly to its continually
renewed delegitimization, most apparent during
capitalism’s big, recurring crises, such as the ones
that broke out in 1873, 1929, and 2008.
4. These crises usually arose out of excessive specu-
lation and erroneous trends in the financial
sector, yet they also affected the “real economy.”
They imperiled not only a few speculators but
also the life chances of broad sections of the pop-
ulation, and they could lead to profound social
and political disruptions. Crises thus brought
home another thing that distinguished capital-
ism in the age of industrialization from previous
variants: namely, that it had become the econo-
my’s dominant regulatory mechanism, inten-
sively influencing society, culture, and politics all
at the same time. This was in contrast to centu-
ries past, when capitalism had mostly led an
insular existence and was embedded in non-
capitalist structures and mentalities.
If capitalism in its developed form had been confined to
a few regions in northwestern Europe prior to the epochal
cusp of 1800, the kind of capitalism dynamized by indus-
trialization took on global dimensions in the nineteenth
century, and particularly in the twentieth. This can be
seen not only, as already mentioned, by the capitalist pen-
etration of new countries and regions, one after another,
especially in East Asia. It is also demonstrated by the grow-
ing interdependence among capitalist processes across na-
tional and continental borders, that is, by the globalization
of capitalism. This is not a new phenomenon as such, but
rather something that could be observed in rudimentary
outline for centuries, as was shown in the previous chap-
ter. Yet from the 1860s through 1914, and again since the
1970s, but especially since 1990, there have been phases
where globalization accelerated significantly. This faster
pace of globalization could be discerned in the expansion
of world trade, a certain convergence in commodity prices
in different regions of the globe, the rapidly growing vol-
ume of worldwide financial transactions, the widespread
rise of multinational enterprises, an increase in border-
crossing labor migration, and the global range of crises.
Globalization is not, to be sure, only an economic phe-
nomenon; rather, it also occurs as a cross-border linkage
connecting the fields of communications, politics, and
culture. Yet capitalism is more than one of the important
forces driving globalization; it is also a field on which glob-
alization takes place, even if this does not always happen
across the board or in a way that renders nation-states any
less important than they used to be.5
From Ownership to Managerial capitalism
Analytically, the capital-labor relationship is central to all
variants of industrial capitalism. Historically, it varies a
great deal. One of the factors determining this was the
profound gestalt switch that unfolded in the structure and
strategies of enterprises in the last two hundred years.
A conceptual distinction needs to be made between cap-
italists and entrepreneurs. The capitalist provides capital
and decides in principle about where and for what it is
used, assumes the risk involved (in theory, at least), and
pockets the profits that arise. The central responsibility of
the entrepreneur is to manage the enterprise, to that end
making decisions about the enterprise’s goals in detail, its
position on the market, its internal structure, and also
about how its workforce is employed.6


At the top of an enterprise in the first phase of industrial-
ization, sometimes also called the Industrial Revolution, the
roles of capitalist and entrepreneur were combined in one
and the same person. He—it was usually a male person, but
there were women as entrepreneurs, too—owned his enter-
prise and managed it. He raised capital, as a rule, from his
own savings, through personal loans, more rarely by way of
a bank credit, perhaps also through cooperation with a part-
ner, and he was liable with his entire fortune. Even when
the factory had become fully grown—for example, a me-
chanical spinning and weaving mill with one or two hun-
dred workers—it usually remained a manageable enterprise
constituted as a partnership, under the control of an owner-
entrepreneur who frequently preferred seeing himself as
“king of the castle” exercising sweeping authority. That the
boss was simultaneously capitalist and entrepreneur had le-
gitimating advantages for him. The entrepreneur’s claim to
leadership could be justified by reference to the risk ulti-
mately born by the capitalist, the claim to profits with refer-
ence to the work of the successful entrepreneur.
During the early phases of industrialization, entrepre-
neurs had close ties with their social milieu almost every-
where, above all through their families. Start-up capital was
frequently raised within the circle of family and relatives.
The history of the Rothschild international banking house;
of the Siemens brothers’ close cooperation in establishing
their enterprises in Berlin, London, and Petersburg; or of
the role of the Brown family in the network of commer-
cial enterprises in Great Britain and the United States (Liv-
erpool, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore) illustrate,
for the second third of the nineteenth century, how the
cohesion of entrepreneurial families contributed to solving
management problems, to creating cross-border business
ties, and to networking with relevant social milieus. The
family was thus both a precondition for and means to mar-
ket success. Economic and cultural capital was passed on
within the family: family firms often resulted from inheri-
tance, which was also their goal. This expectation evidently
motivated many owner-entrepreneurs to undertake invest-
ments that were future oriented. For the most part, these
owner-entrepreneurs were energetic, coolly calculating per-
sons ruthlessly pursuing advantage—typically men, rarely
women—who knew how to outdo their competitors and
exploit their workers. Yet their close family ties gave addi-
tional meaning, beyond the pure profit motive, to their
efforts, to their struggle with competitors, and to their ex-
ploitation of workers. How little profit was regarded as an
absolute value is demonstrated by situations in which fam-
ily entrepreneurs dispensed with taking steps that might
expand the firm. This was a relinquishment deliberately in-
tended to avoid endangering family control over the busi-
ness, a fate that might have threatened them if capital
expansion had been resolutely undertaken by relying on a
bank or by floating shares on the stock market. Still, the
constraints of the market set limits to such noneconomic
priorities. Whoever purposely relinquished dynamism was
casually putting his business livelihood at risk. It was essen-
tial to push forward so as not to fall behind; merely securing
the status quo was either not permitted by this competitive
system, with its continuous innovation, or tolerated only
within narrow limits.

One can see, looking at the link between family and busi-
ness, how capitalism was by no means substituting brand-
new social institutions for old ones it had destroyed. Rather,
at least during lengthy transitional periods, it amalgamated
the social arrangements capitalism itself had brought forth
with previously existing ones, implanting itself in older
structures and only changing them over the long run. To
this extent, it acted and continues to act in a manner that
is not exactly revolutionary. It accommodates different so-
cial realities. This explains the variety of guises in which
industrial capitalism has appeared to this day.
Close ties between family and enterprise are still fre-
quent, especially in small and medium-size enterprises,
which make up the majority of enterprises everywhere
even today and are constantly being replenished with
start-ups. Even in the management bodies of major com-
panies that had been transformed long ago from their
original form as partnerships, or that had been founded
from the very start as joint-stock companies, the influence
of owner-families, both founding and current, remained
considerable, even in the second half of the twentieth
century and especially in Great Britain and Japan.8 Yet, on
the whole, it was managerial capitalism that prevailed in
the ever-growing field of large and giant enterprises, which
as a rule were constituted as joint-stock companies based
on stocks or shares (or as limited liability corporations of
a similar kind). That means that the managerial function
gradually shifted into the hands of salaried entrepreneurs
(“managers”) with limited liability. It also means that a
certain separation of the capitalist and entrepreneurial
function occurred, although there were, as mentioned,
durable forms of cooperation between members of the
owning family and managers. In any event, the owners of
capital continue to exercise influence over basic decisions
of the enterprise as stakeholders even in fully formed
managerial capitalism. Germany and the United States
were in the lead on the path to managerial capitalism,
along with Japan in its own way. The driving forces were
growth, capital requirements, and organization.
The German electrical engineering firm Siemens em-
ployed 90 people at home in Germany in 1854, 650 in
1874, nearly 4,000 in 1894, but by 1914 a good 57,000. Em-
ployment at the largest German enterprise—Krupp—
reached 20,000 in 1887 and 64,000 by 1907, while the
Thyssen-based corporation Vereinigte Stahlwerke ( United
Steelworks) had 200,000 employees by 1927, and the larg-
est American enterprise U.S. Steel a respectable 100,000 in
1901 and 440,000 employees by 1929. In the late 1960s,
the number of people working at Siemens worldwide was
270,000, compared to 30,000 workers and salaried em-
ployees at Deutsche Bank. By 2010 these numbers had
jumped to 370,000 and 98,000 respectively. In the same
year, the German post office Deutsche Post with 425,000
and Siemens with 405,000 employees occupied the top
spots in the German rankings, yet they were only in
eleventh and thirteenth place on the list of the largest en-
terprises worldwide, a list that was led by the retail con-
glomerate Walmart (with 2.1 million employees) and
China National Petroleum (with 1.65 million employees).
What stood behind these exorbitant increases in employ-
ment was a mixture of highly diverse events—mergers of
firms, above all, in addition to firms’ internal growth—
and diverse goals: taking advantage of “economies of
scale,” that is, of opportunities for sales and profits under
changing technological and marketing conditions (mass
production and mass markets), the pursuit of bigness and
thus also of wealth, prestige, and power, even if these as-
pirations did not always pay off in business terms. Fre-
quently, too, this was expansion driven by defensive mo-
tives, since self-containment in the face of aggressive
competition can easily lead to a firm’s downfall.
In the first phase of industrialization, even the most ex-
pensive enterprises got by with relatively modest capital,
as in German mining during the 1850s, where the order of
magnitude ranged from 1 to 2, or at most 3, million marks;
the capital for factories in other sectors, especially in the
extended textile branch, was without exception much
lower than this. But between 1887 and 1927 average capi-
tal for the hundred largest German enterprises increased
from 9.4 to 59 million marks. In 1901, U.S. Steel was capi-
talized at $1.4 billion. In 1970 Deutsche Bank’s own capi-
tal resources still amounted to 1.4 billion DM, but by 2010
it was already €49 billion. In the same year, Siemens’s own
capital resources amounted to €28 billion. As a rule, these
kinds of sums exceeded and still exceed the means avail-
able to individual owner-families. Financing via the capi-
tal market and, along with this, the organizational form of
the joint-stock company became obligatory.
Sometimes it is said that there was a “Second Industrial
Revolution” that happened during the last quarter of the
nineteenth century and first few decades of the twentieth,
specifically in those countries of Europe and North America
that had enjoyed a relatively early head start with the first
round of industrialization. This alludes to the spectacular
rise of “new industries” in electrical manufacturing, chemi-
cals, and vehicle production; to the initial exploitation of
petroleum as an energy source; and to the enormous in-
crease in importance of technology and science in indus-
trial production. But the designation also tries to capture
the centralization of capital that took place via comprehen-
sive combinations in the form of mergers, conglomerates,
holdings, cartels, and interest associations. These mergers
and alliances, which surfaced partly in reaction to the pre-
ceding cyclical downturns in the 1870s, were trying to limit
or even eliminate competition. Among the driving forces
were major entrepreneurs like John D. Rockefeller, archi-
tect of Standard Oil of New Jersey (starting in the 1870s), or
Emil Kirdorf, the general director of the Gelsenkirchen
Mining Company Inc. and architect of the 1893 Rhenish-
Westphalian Coal Syndicate. Acting in supportive roles
were often major banks that, in contrast to earlier practice,
invested massively in industry and worked closely with in-
dividual industrial enterprises. Integration via stock owner-
ship and mutual representation on executive committees
proved to be tried and tested methods leading to a compre-
hensive networking of industrial and bank capital, without
it being possible to say—in contrast to what is frequently
assumed—that one side (either industry or banks) dom-
inated the other. Subsequently there was an unprecedented
concentration of power and wealth in the hands of a few
major industrialists, especially in the United States, where
Rockefeller—the richest man in the world, with a for-
tune worth about $330 billion (in 2008 values)—Carnegie,

Vanderbilt, Duke, Stanford, and others were already labeled
by contemporaries with the critical and polemical designa-
tion “robber barons.” Some of these major companies con-
centrated, like the British-American Tobacco Corporation
founded in 1902, on cross-border business and developed
multinational structures. Most of the big firms were highly
integrated in functional terms and diversified by product:
this means that inside a single company they combined, in
whole or in part, the functions of raw material supply, pro-
duction, processing, and distribution; at the same time,
they produced entire ranges of different goods and ser-
vices. They thus combined by organizational means what
in other, earlier cases had been handled by independent
enterprises that were more highly specialized and linked to
each other through market ties.
As a result, there emerged highly complex, systemati-
cally structured, elaborately coordinated megastructures
with managerial personnel who were, increasingly, aca-
demically certified. In the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries, these corporate structures were vertically
integrated, centralized, and rather hierarchic, after 1945
in the West more likely to be rather decentralized and
structured as federations of semiautonomous units. Over-
all, this was a profound change of form for capitalism. What
was once the clearly dominating form of coordination
via market mechanisms was now, much more strongly than
before, complemented by coordination using organiza-
tional and quasi-political methods. This was referred to as
organized capitalism, although, in spite of all the alliances
and monopolistic tendencies, severe competition contin-
ued to take place even between these gigantic enterprises,
competitive challenges that could even threaten these
firms’ autonomy and existence. Relative to the many more
numerous small and medium-size enterprises, the big en-
terprises did remain in the minority everywhere. Yet they
were extremely important. In 1962 the fifty largest Amer-
ican industrial enterprises had over a third, and the five
hundred largest together over two-thirds, of the country’s
commercial-industrial capital. They were, incidentally
and without exception, managed by white, predominantly
Protestant men from a background that was (at least) middle
class and with (at least) a college degree.9
The rise of managerial capitalism was accompanied by
great hopes and great fears. Both have, as a rule, proven to
be exaggerated.
It was hoped that managerial capitalism—owing to the
dispersion of ownership it made possible and to owner-
ship’s declining importance for recruiting management—
would produce a bit of democratization. On the one hand,
the dispersion of stock ownership, its growing attractive-
ness for investors both small and large, and its increas-
ing importance for insuring against life risks and for care
of the elderly did indeed significantly strengthen and
broaden capitalism’s anchoring in society. It has tied life
for the multitude even more clearly than before to the ups
and downs of capitalist business. One need only think of
the widespread policies for old-age provision via pension
funds that are among the biggest actors on financial mar-
kets. In addition, the criterion “ownership of the means of
production” has become less important for recruiting and
promoting management, and there is a difference between
the typical career paths of owner-entrepreneurs and man-
agers. Yet access to the bastions of economic power overall
have hardly opened up much further. Rising from dish-
washer to millionaire has remained the exception. A high
degree of intergenerational status inheritance is also
brought about by the selection process typical of manage-
rial capitalism. This process, in addition to training ac-
quired both scholastically and practically, puts a premium
on the cultural capital imparted by social background and
the networking relationships associated therewith.
Conversely, it was feared that the rise of managers would
increase irresponsible action in the upper echelons of firms,
since salaried entrepreneurs would certainly no longer be
forced to answer for their failures by putting their entire
economic and social livelihood on the line, just as (con-
versely) they would only profit personally in a limited way
from any entrepreneurial success. In the light of recent ex-
periences with “structured irresponsibility” in today’s fi-
nance capitalism, it is important to understand why this
fear did not, on the whole, come true during the classical
era of managerial capitalism—which, in the West, lasted
through the 1970s and 1980s. On the one hand, those com-
ponents of managerial earnings linked to a company’s suc-
cess, including managers’ shares in capital, contributed to
managerial responsibility. On the other, this occupational
group developed professional attitudes, with corresponding
techniques for mutual social control. But, above all, in spite
of growing mobility, success and failure, even for salaried
entrepreneurs, remained quite visibly tied to the success
and failure of certain enterprises—“their” enterprises—both
for the managers themselves and for others. This proved de-
cisive (whereas it seems to be different in today’s financial
market capitalism). The identification of an Emil Rathenau
with “his” managerially run enterprise AEG around 1910
was certainly not much weaker than the way that the son of
rival company founder Wilhelm von Siemens identified
with “his” traditional enterprise, still controlled by family
even after having become a joint-stock company.
As a whole, however, managers were less influenced and
constrained by extra-economic (e.g., family-related) con-
siderations than were owner-entrepreneurs. For the sala-
ried entrepreneurs of managerial capitalism, therefore, eco-
nomic motives were actually more clear-cut than they were
for the owner-entrepreneurs of the Industrial Revolution.
On the whole, therefore, the salaried entrepreneurs should
have been able to reach decisions more dynamically and
behave more expansively than owner-capitalists.10
Financialization
The tendency to detach economic action from social con-
texts, the concentration on goals of profit and growth cou-
pled with a simultaneous indifference to other goals, the
autotelic character of capitalism, a feature already inherent
in managerial capitalism though not yet made absolute—
over the last several decades, all these trends reached new
heights with the arrival of “financialization,” the rise of
what can be called financial market capitalism, finance capitalism, or investor capitalism. The level attained by finan-
cialization is of a degree that has imparted a new quality to
the system and has presented it with new, yet unsolved,
challenges. Finance capitalism—as the epitome of business
transactions that have little to do with production and
exchange of goods but that are made above all with money
and (in the milieu of) money changers, brokers, banks,
stock exchanges, investors, and capital markets—is an old
phenomenon, as was shown above. Yet since the 1970s
something new has happened, in three respects:
1. What happened was connected with the end of
the Bretton Woods system of international cur-
rency regulation and the drastic oil price increases
of the 1970s, with the onset of deregulation, and
with a certain degree of deindustrialization in
some Western countries that led to a rapid expan-
sion and upgrading of the financial sector, espe-
cially in England and the United States, where
this sector’s share of overall production grew from
2 percent in the 1950s to approximately 8 or
9 percent in 2008. The assets of banks grew explo-
sively. Cross-border capital movements swelled
from 4 percent of overall product worldwide in
the 1980s to 13 percent in 2000 and 20 percent
in 2007. Much of this was accounted for by the
transfer from oil-producing and emerging market
countries (China, Southeast Asia, India, Brazil) to
Europe and North America. But foreign invest-
ments from the first countries to industrialize also
boomed, with finance and insurance getting the
lion’s share. As the investor George Soros wrote
in 1998: “The system is very favorable to financial
capital, which is free to pick and choose where
to go. . . . It can be envisaged as a gigantic circu-
latory system. . . . It is market fundamentalism
that has put financial capital into the driver’s
seat.” Jürgen Stark, longtime chief economist at
the European Central Bank, decreed in 2011 that
the financial sector had long since left its ancil-
lary role in service to the economy behind, that
it had become too large and self-referential. The
“neoliberal” policy of deregulation that started
in England and the United States but soon took
effect internationally contributed greatly to this
trend, as it did to the exorbitant rise of profits for
bankers. In order to participate in the boom of
the financial sector,11 major industrial enterprises
like General Motors and General Electric added
on their own financial service providers, which
soon brought in higher profits than each compa-
ny’s core business itself. Investment banks, in-
vestment funds, over-the-counter private equity
companies, and other capital investment and
holding companies sprang up in large numbers.
There was talk of “financialization.” A large share
of capital movements served (and serves), not
investment for productive purposes, but rather
speculation, even if the two are often hard to dis-
tinguish clearly from one another. Sizable profits
were earned that did not correspond to any added
value. Expectations of garnering the highest pos-
sible profits increased, along with eagerness to
undertake great risks. It must be conceded that
the financial sector was and is also intrinsically
heterogeneous; municipal savings banks or coop-
erative banks remained more strongly committed
to the traditional banking business. But aggres-
sive hedge funds, acting like “locusts” (as Ger-
many’s former Social Democratic labor minister
and party chair Franz Müntefering called them),
bought up profitable businesses, “rationalized”
them, cannibalized them, and divided them up
in order to resell them at a profit and then move
on. Ivan Berend writes: “The morals of solid
banking, together with trust in institutions, were
lost. Gambling replaced a solid business attitude
and increased both gains and risks. The boom
culminated in the first years of the twenty-first
century.” Left to itself, driven by tough compe-
tition, and largely detached from embedment
in the real economy or society, at least this part
of the capitalist economy proved incapable
of developing and implementing generally ac-
cepted rules for conducting business.12 The ma-
thematicization and digitalization of speculative
transactions has led to an economy in which
money managers have acted not only as driving
forces but increasingly also as driven entities ad-
dicted to their own techniques and ever stiffer
competition.13
2. Credit and thus debt have characterized capital-
ism from the start. But in the last quarter of the
twentieth and in the first decade of the twenty-
first century, the inclination to indebtedness has
grown exorbitantly in many countries and sec-
tors. For example, the quotient of government
debt rose, and indeed this was happening long
before the international financial crisis of 2008
led governments to renew their massive borrow-
ing with the aim of bailing out their countries’
banks. Germany’s national debt quotient (mea-
sured as a share of gross domestic product) os-
cillated between 16 and 24 percent from the
beginning of the 1950s through 1975, yet by
1985 it had climbed to 41 percent, by 1995 to
56 percent, and by 2005 to 69 (81 percent by
2011). The corresponding figures for France are
16 percent (1975), 31 percent (1985), 55 percent
(1995), 67 percent (2005), and 86 percent (2011).
In Sweden the quotient rose between 1975 and
2005 from 28 percent to 50 percent (with an in-
terim peak of 84 per cent in 1996), in the United
States from 33 percent to 68 percent, in Brazil
from 30 percent to 69 percent, and in Japan from
24 percent to 186 percent.14 A second example:
the savings quotient of Americans ( private house-
holds) was almost 5 percent in 1930, reached
more than 10 percent in the early 1980s, but then
fell to 0 percent by 2005–2007 (and was at 2 per-
cent in 2013). A third example: the average eq-
uity capital of many American and European
banks before the recent crisis was less than 10 per-
cent, frequently less than 5 percent, and some-
times not even 1 percent of their proven total
assets, compared with around 25 percent at the
beginning of the twentieth century; most of the
remainder consisted of outside capital, that is, of
“debts.”

Each one of these three phenomena is quite
complex and has different causes: first, peculiari-
ties of government policy, which frequently has
no reliable mechanisms for self-restraint and
readily postpones solutions to problems into the
future; then the rapid rise of consumer capitalism
since the 1950s, which solidifies acceptance of
capitalism among the broad population but si-
multaneously stimulates an inclination to live
beyond one’s means by making available highly
attractive sales pitches, permanent demand stim-
ulus, and seductive offers of credit; and, finally,
decision-making structures inside banks, which
cause high earnings not to be reinvested but in-
stead distributed to stockholders and managers.
Yet, at a general level, all three of the variants
of indebtedness mentioned here may be under-
stood as indicators of one and the same funda-
mental change, which the sociologist Ralf
Dahrendorf described in 2009 as the problematic
transition from “savings capitalism” to “pump
capitalism.” In 1979 another sociologist, Daniel
Bell, had already analyzed the tension between the
necessity of saving inherent to capitalism, that is,
of postponing rewards into the future, and the
equally system-inherent necessity of spending on
consumption in the capitalist present. In the
meantime, this contradiction has intensified. We
are dealing with a lasting source of destabiliza-
tion for capitalism in the age of its financializa-
tion, with the core of an unresolved crisis and
with, on top of this, a fundamental problem of
culture and politics in the relatively affluent
countries of the present time.16
3. Power relations and decision-making processes at
the higher echelons of major enterprises have also
shifted over the last several years and decades, on
the road from managerial to finance or investor
capitalism. In managerial enterprises, which were
clearly dominant among large firms through the
1980s, the executive committee, company board,
or even CEO had considerable autonomy and
weight vis-à-vis owners’ interests, especially when
business was going well. Either the bank—often
closely linked with a production, trade, or service
enterprise in a long-term relationship—saw to it
that there was managerial autonomy, since the
bank was less interested in short-term profits than
it was in long-term success and therefore backed
management (with credit, among other things)
even in opposition to stockholder interests (espe-
cially in Germany and Japan). Or the board of the
enterprise enjoyed relative independence because
ownership of the company was dispersed among
numerous small and medium-size stockholders
who, given their fragmentation, were hardly in a
position to issue a collective challenge and were
content with decent returns on their investment
even if the last opportunity to squeeze out in-
creased profits was not always fully exhausted (as
in the United States, above all). In both cases the
chances were great that the management of the
enterprise would reinvest large portions of the
profits made, rather than distribute them to
owners—which strengthened management’s rela-
tive autonomy vis-à-vis the capital market.
This changed with the rise of asset management
companies (especially the large investment and
pension funds) and of increasingly aggressive
firms specializing in investment banking. They are
in tough competition with each other for inves-
tors and savers, whom they promise yields on in-
terest or shares in future profits that are favorable.
Their track record can be expressed in a few key
figures and is highly transparent. Even small dif-
ferences count in their competition for investors
and savers, whose assets they bundle together into
weightier securities and whose interests as owners
(“shareholder value”) they promise to make their
own and represent very toughly, professionally,
and constantly against those of management.17
The logic of the capital markets now penetrates
much more directly into company strategies than
was the case in times when ownership or mana-
gerial capitalism was the distinctive model. The
market becomes more ubiquitous and more com-
pulsive. Room to maneuver for individual com-
pany managements is shrinking. Enterprises are
becoming more like one another. The influence
of the banks is declining. The representatives of
the funds exercise control, but they are simulta-
neously controlled; they demand permanent ac-
counting, which they must permanently render
themselves. They can sell at any time and restruc-
ture their portfolios, which gives them great power.
Volatility is on the rise. On average, an investor
from the 1960s held his stocks (in New York) for
eight to nine years, but now it is less than a year.
Important decisions are made by fund directors,
investment bankers, stockbrokers, analysts, and
rating experts, who are managers but often speak
in the name of the owners and represent their in-
terests in obtaining high returns. They usually
have no ties to the many enterprises over whose
fate they help decide, so to speak, from the out-
side. They are not particularly interested in these
enterprises’ contents, traditions, and agents. They
decide on the basis of usual performance indica-
tors and sensitive market signals, and they are
oriented one-dimensionally to profit or share-
holder value. This is what they must do; other-
wise they will damage their fund.18
In this relatively aloof and still, at core, deregu-
lated system of investor capitalism, it is neither
urgent nor possible to justify the very abstract ac-
tivity of these “money managers” in the context
of more far-reaching, perhaps noneconomic pur-
poses. In one revealing scene from his reality-
saturated novel Bonfire of the Vanities, Tom Wolfe
depicts how the successful, prosperous investment
banker and Wall Street broker Sherman McCoy
attempts to explain to his inquiring six-year-old
daughter what he does for a living so that she can
understand and admire his job. At his beach club
on Long Island, the assembled family members
await his answer with anticipation. The attempt
at explaining his job fails, the daughter breaks
into tears, and it remains for the reader to decide
if this is owing to the complexity of McCoy’s line
of work or to whether his occupation really makes
no sense beyond the job itself and the goal of
enrichment.
It cannot be emphasized strongly enough that
(mostly smaller, but quite numerous) owner-
run businesses, manager-capitalists of the classic
kind, and the new type of globally active finance
capitalists exist everywhere alongside each other
and in the greatest variety of overlapping forms.
Certainly, contemporary capitalism cannot be
reduced to finance, financial market, or investor
capitalism. The rise of finance and investor cap-
italism during the last several decades does,
however, represent a far-reaching change in the
overall system. Functional differentiation within
capitalism has advanced significantly: mobilizing
capital and investing have been separated even
more sharply from other dimensions of leading
firms. Raising and investing capital were made
the responsibility of specialized actors operating
strictly according to the logic of capital markets.
This has considerably strengthened the weight of
the capitalist function relative to the entrepre-
neurial and the managerial functions. More radi-
cally than ever before, fundamental investment
decisions have been detached from the contexts
in which they were once embedded. The logic of
markets has further emancipated itself from any
consideration of noneconomic interests and ori-
entations. Furthermore, decision-making struc-
tures have clearly overstepped the boundaries
within which individual enterprises operate, the
outer edges of which have become more fluid.
The international financial crisis of 2008 conspic-
uously demonstrated what self-destructive and
all-around dangerous potentials lurk inside the
dynamic of the new investor capitalism when
this new type of capitalism is left to itself—and
that means left to the banks, investors, stock-
brokers, and other “money managers.”20 What
is at stake is finding new forms of embedding.
Whether that can be done remains an open
question.
Work in capitalism
Since Marx, Weber, and many others, “free” wage labor on
a contractual basis has been regarded as the central form as-
sumed by work in capitalism. Yet the debate about whether
this is accurate and how this should be understood is once
again in full swing. The move toward more global perspec-
tives has intensified historians’ awareness of how capitalist
businesses could and can also flourish on the basis of un-
free labor. We need only think of the colonial and postcolo-
nial plantation economy with slave labor and other forms
of forced labor, of the exploitation of prisoners and inmates
of camps in the wars and dictatorships of the twentieth
century, but also of new forms of unfree labor today, espe-
cially in the global South. Historians have, moreover, be-
come more intensely aware of how forms of bound labor
and extra-economic compulsion have also played a major
role for a long time in European and North American agrar-
ian and industrial capitalism, as is demonstrated by the his-
tory of serfdom and farm servants, but also of peonage and
“indentured laborers.” Is not the very distinction between
unfree labor and free labor on a contractual basis altogether
quite permeable and blurry in light of the many elements
of unfreedom in the reality of wage work? Should one not
draw the logical conclusion and expand the usual defini-
tions of the “working class” so that all types of subaltern
persons or families—and not just wage workers and the
members of their families—are included?21 In this book,
nevertheless, I hold to the notion of wage labor as the cen-
tral form of work in capitalism for these reasons:
1. For one thing, the trend toward comprehensive
commodification represents a key component of
the capitalist system, and wage labor is the most
consistent application of this principle to human
labor (although not the only one).
2. For another, in spite of numerous exceptions and
countervailing tendencies, in the long run wage
labor has become and is becoming more extensive
and widespread, and not just in the course of capi-
talist industrialization in the West but (in the
meantime) worldwide. As capitalism, industrial
capitalism in particular, has widened and deep-
ened, wage labor became, and is still becoming,
step by step, the prevailing form of work, al-
though it appears in many forms and combina-
tions. This had, and still has, something to do
with the fact that free wage labor on a contractual
basis corresponds best, in principle, to the particu-
lar kind of instrumental rationality inherent in
capitalist enterprises. For, unlike workers who per-
form bonded labor with their entire person over
long periods of time (such as slaves), wage workers
who are contractually obligated to perform certain
services temporarily but are otherwise free as well
as terminable—wage workers like this allow busi-
nesses and employers to recruit, shift, and if need
be also quickly dismiss employees with a view to-
ward entrepreneurial objectives. This is advanta-
geous to the company’s interest. Under conditions
of developed, differentiated labor markets, and in
the face of rapid economic change as capitalist
normality, it was and is in the interest of capitalist
actors to prefer wage labor to unfree labor.
3. Finally, it should be taken into consideration that
an employment relationship under wage labor
can be terminated by the worker as well as by the
employer. The employment relationship may sub-
jugate the worker’s labor power, but not his or her
entire person, to the employer’s order-giving au-
thority and the constraints of the enterprise. This
is an important and coveted element of freedom.
The transition to wage work could and can have a
liberating effect, even though entry into such an
exchange relationship of work for wages is fre-
quently a matter of urgency for the worker on
sheer grounds of survival, and although the em-
ployment relationship, once accepted, is usually
characterized by much control and discipline.
This social and legal quality distinguished and
still distinguishes wage labor, in principle, from
the different forms of unfree labor, and this dis-
tinction needs to be taken seriously from the
standpoint of life histories and historiography.22
Yet, on the other hand, it bears repeating one more time
that, under certain conditions, capitalism has functioned
and can continue to do so on the basis of unfree labor,
and that, again under certain conditions, capitalist agents
have sometimes preferred and continue to prefer exploit-
ing unfree labor. They preferred and prefer whatever,
under given conditions, promises higher and sustainable
profits. And above all it needs to be emphasized that, in
the long history of capitalism, free wage labor has mostly
not appeared in any pure form, but rather in amalgam-
ation with other forms of employment.
In an elementary sense, and to a limited extent, wage
labor existed prior to capitalism. Certainly, before capital-
ism the largest share of dependent labor was performed
under conditions of bondage—as slave labor or (as in medi-
eval and early modern Europe) by serfs and peasant under-
lings, by servants and maids in servile status, and by
journeymen dependent on masters and guilds. Nonethe-
less, over the centuries, there were numerous persons with
either few or no possessions—men, women, and children—
who performed work for remuneration, usually for short
periods and constantly changing jobs, often also at differ-
ent sites, for lords and peasants, for artisans and merchants,
in parishes and monasteries, at construction sites or in
workshops: they were employed as agricultural workers

with different designations, as day laborers, casual laborers,
seasonal or migratory workers, as temporary workers of
many different kinds. One barely made a living this way,
and yet the payments in kind or money wages achieved this
way frequently supplemented the small incomes that the
individual or his family drew at the same time from other
sources, for example, from the ownership of tiny properties.
In one and the same family, at one and the same place of
work, there were often persons with different occupational
status working together, as in early modern plantations
where slaves, “indentured laborers” obligated to work for a
time, and free wage workers coexisted. With the penetra-
tion of capitalism into agriculture and cottage industry,
there was an increase in the number of wage workers above
all on the land. Through the gradual loosening of tradi-
tional ties (e.g., of the journeyman’s dependence on his
master and his master’s guild) and the growing inclusion
of working people such as artisans and cottage workers in
supraregional market relationships, moreover, capitalism
reinforced the elements of wage labor inside traditional em-
ployment relationships. With respect to dependent labor-
ers, too, it was the case that social relationships shaped by
capitalism seldom made their appearance abruptly and by
quickly destroying old ways; instead, they ensconced them-
selves in traditional social relationships, expanding, loosen-
ing, and relativizing them (under the impact, to be sure, of
tensions and conflicts), changing them step by step. One
and the same person might, in the course of his life, occupy
many different positions, and these often included distinc-
tive phases of underemployment and unemployment, and
certainly also of dire poverty.23

It will be evident that this hodgepodge of wage labor
marked by countless transitions and mixed forms cannot
be neatly subdivided and is therefore very difficult to quan-
tify. And yet, if one employs a generous conception of
“proletarian” that includes day laborers and casual labor-
ers, agricultural workers and homeworkers, workers in
manufactories and mines as well as servants and journey-
men, then one can concur with Charles Tilly’s estimate
that in 1550 about one-quarter and in 1750 almost 60 per-
cent of Europe’s population should be included in the pro-
letarian classes. More than half of these lived on the land.
It was therefore not some idyllic world, clearly ordered or
even static, that was then transformed by nineteenth-
century industrial capitalism. Instead, this was a world in
motion, with little in the way of formalized employment
relationships and living conditions, a world replete with
scarcity, destitution, and distress—at least in the large and
rapidly growing sector of society underneath the rural and
urban middle classes.24
Yet only in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries did
fully developed wage labor start to become an overwhelm-
ing mass phenomenon, especially in the West, although
there were rudiments of modern wage labor in other parts
of the world as well. One thing that helped in the West—
something partly accomplished by revolution and war (as
in France, the United States, and Haiti), though more of-
ten because of reforms (incremental changes that usually
dragged on for decades)—was the abolition of those tradi-
tional social orders in which unfree labor had become sta-
bilized. The list of changes favoring wage labor would have
to include the prohibition of the slave trade (starting in
1808), followed by the ban on slavery itself, but also the
judicially enforced outlawing (starting in the 1820s in the
United States) of “indentured” servitude, that form of tem-
porary bondage in which workers were contractually
bound to work off a debt for transport costs paid in ad-
vance (for example, to cover a journey across the Atlantic).
Also on the list would be the emancipation of the peas-
antry and the abolition of serfdom (which finally hap-
pened in Russia after 1861), along with the abolition or
dilution of guild regulations in the course of implement-
ing “freedom of trade.” Against this background, what
happened in most countries was a quite gradual advance-
ment of wage labor going hand in hand with the gradual
implementation of capitalistic principles, often through
mixed forms of work that persisted for a long time.
The “temporary servitude” of “indentured laborers”
(contract workers) represented such a mixed form; it was a
category that included the important group of “coolies,”
half-free laborers from Asia who were transported across
long distances in order to be employed in the plantations
(sugar, rubber, tobacco, etc.) that underwent renewed ex-
pansion after 1860, mostly in tropical and subtropical re-
gions of Asia, America, and Africa. Another example would
be the slaves for hire who were rented out by their owners
to entrepreneurs in the southern states of the United
States, Latin America, and West Africa and who did tem-
porary work for wages, some of which they had to pass on
from their temporary employers to their permanent own-
ers. Russian serfs were also employed from time to time
as wage workers, on assignment from their masters. In
the South African diamond mines during the nineteenth
century, “closed compounds” were set up in which miners
were locked up under prisonlike conditions: an example
of mixing wage and forced labor. One must certainly recall
the millions of homeworkers in the European putting-out
system, who basically performed wage work but still did
this in the form of traditional outwork, within the family
unit and inside their own four walls. This usually hap-
pened in the countryside, although after 1870 more and
more in the big cities, too, where clothing and other
ready-made apparel would be manufactured in home in-
dustries, as a rule by women and children under the heavy
supervision of intermediate entrepreneurs and under op-
pressive working conditions: the sweatshops of New York,
Paris and Berlin around 1900 come to mind. In Prussia
and other German states, a legally codified servile status
(Gesinderecht) lasted until 1918, a status that curtailed
liberties for large categories of agricultural workers and
household servants; nonetheless, farmhands, maids, and
domestic servants gradually became wage laborers of a
special kind. There were other relationships of mixed em-
ployment in which wage labor appeared as one element
among many. In the long run, however, the wage labor
element prevailed.25
In addition to the gigantic construction sites of the
time, it was above all in and by way of industrial factories
and mining that wage labor became a mass phenomenon.
This was not only because this sector grew disproportion-
ately large during the first phases of industrialization, be-
cause workers appeared here in huge crowds, and because
this was also a field where small and large enterprises were
active, an area in which the transition from ownership to
managerial capitalism as described above was notably tak-
ing place. More to the point, it also had to do with the
structure of industrial enterprises and their relationship to
their social environment. In factories and mines, wage
labor was taking place at sites spatially separated from the
households of those working there. Moreover, these were
enterprises with a division of labor, a separation of man-
agement and execution, work sequences that were becom-
ing more instrumentally rational, and with corresponding
requirements of discipline. This included adjustment to
specific structures of time and meant that, more clearly
than before, the sphere of labor was divorced from other
areas of life, spatially and temporally. Its capitalist logic
could unfold relatively independently in that distinct in-
dustrial sphere. Here wage labor developed in a fairly pure
form. It was experienced as such. Indeed, workers encoun-
tered wage labor as something that united them a bit be-
yond their specialization and distinguished them from
management. A worker might come across instances of co-
operation between capital and labor but also times when
the relationship was fraught with conflicts and tensions.
These conflicts revolved in part around questions about
how to distribute the product being made (e.g., in the
conflict over wages and work time); they also concerned
questions of power, of who had precedence or would be
subordinated, for example in controversies about the or-
ganization of work or about autonomy and, later on,
codetermination.
Of course, industrial work had precursors in the less nu-
merous early modern manufactories and mines. But in all
these respects, “big industry” in the form of textile facto-
ries, coal mines, steelworks, and mechanical engineering
companies was something new in the era of industrializa-
tion, separated from what people had been accustomed to
by a certain hiatus with respect to time, space, and experi-
enced structures. Accordingly, it captured the imagination
of contemporaries, who were both fascinated and shocked
by it. “Big industry” had shaped the emerging discussion
about “capitalism” since the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury. This industrial capitalism also shaped the concepts
and views of Marx.26 In the first phase of industrialization,
workers suffered poverty and deprivation under the harsh-
est kind of exploitation, enduring extremely long working
hours and low wages, and being subject to sharp disci-
pline, both inside and outside industrial factories. The
children laboring in mine shafts, the long, uniform rows
of young women lined up next to their mechanized work
stations in huge textile mills, the living quarters in dark
cellars of overcrowded tenements in the working-class sec-
tions of the rapidly growing city, the desperate uprising of
starving outworkers facing pressure from more productive
industrial factories, like the Silesian weavers in the 1840s
whose plight was later on dramatized by the popular poet
Gerhart Hauptmann on the stage—these are pictures of
misery and capitalist exploitation that have been engraved
in collective memory.
These constellations cannot be explored in detail here,
any more than it is possible to describe every aspect of the
gradual upward trend (though a trend frequently inter-
rupted by crises and wars) of improved working and living
conditions that took place in large parts of the world in
spite of lingering and newly emerging pockets of exploita-
tion and poverty that accompanied the ongoing process
of industrialization. After countless tribulations and con-
flicts, innovations and reforms in the world of work as
well as in politics and society, the character of wage labor
has profoundly changed. In a large core sector dominated
by large private firms and public enterprises, the practices
implemented extensively by the third quarter of the twen-
tieth century were earnings increases geared toward the
family wage, forceful reduction in working hours (even if
accompanied by equally forceful intensification of work),
hedging against risk by guaranteed entitlements in case of
accident, sickness, old age, and dismissal, as well as indi-
vidual and collective labor rights. This is true, at least, for
large portions of the industrialized world. The applica-
ble term is “standard employment”—“normal working
conditions” (Normalarbeitsverhältnis in German)—but this
makes it easy to forget that, for centuries, this achieve-
ment was anything but standard or normal, that even
today it represents an exception, and that it is called into
question by new developments even in places where it
had already been implemented.27 Here is a brief list of the
three most important motors driving those developments
that somewhat helped achieve such “normal working
conditions.” All three are fundamentally connected with
wage labor.
1. In businesses, advances in productivity were
achieved that first made the above-mentioned
improvements possible. In the interest of increas-
ing productivity, numerous business manage-
ments at an advanced stage of industrialization
discovered that shortening working hours, care-
ful treatment of “labor power” as a resource, and
certain concessions to workers’ demands also
served business success. These changes were fa-
vored not only by philanthropically- and reform-
minded entrepreneurs, like Robert Owen in
Scotland or Ernst Abbe in Jena, who were always
around. There were also soberly calculating man-
agers and owners of capital who became, to some
extent, reformers within their own businesses, es-
pecially in branches that made high demands on
the skills of their personnel.
2. Yet that would not have been enough to initiate
change. Equally important, therefore, was a sec-
ond impetus: government intervention. The
readiness of state institutions to use laws, ordi-
nances, and controls in order to combat abuses
in the working world and secure rights for work-
ers had many motives. One such motive, how-
ever, was connected to the public visibility that
wage labor gained when it no longer took place
at home, on a peasant’s holding, or in some
other traditional relationship, but rather at a sep-
arate site, in the factory or coal mine. This was
the case, for example, with child labor. It once
had been regarded as a normal part of any agri-
cultural operation or of proto-industrial cottage
work. But now that it was detached from the
family and the household, it became a prob-
lem to be monitored and subjected to critical
scrutiny, especially by a public concerned about
education: this scrutiny made an important con-
tribution by politicizing the problem and getting
the state to actively fight child labor. For exam-
ple, in Prussia after 1839, a ban implemented in
several stages contributed decisively to the even-
tual disappearance of industrial child labor in
mines and in factories.28 The next section of this
chapter examines the role of state interventions
in capitalism.
Finally, a word about the labor movement. Wage
labor is, in key respects, not free at all. Not free-
dom, but subordination and discipline are what
the wage labor relationship entails for workers
after they have entered into it. One may, more-
over, regard it as frivolous or cynical to regard
nonownership of the means of production as
proof of “freedom,” as sometimes happens. But
wage workers are indeed free—unlike forced
laborers, slaves, serfs, indentured laborers, ser-
vants, farmhands in servile positions, and artisan
journeymen embedded in corporative rules—
to the extent that they enter an employment re-
lationship that is, in principle, free of extra-
economic compulsion, that they can decide to
terminate of their own free will, and that in-
volves the labor services of the worker but not
the subordination of him or her as a whole
person. This is the emancipatory element of
wage labor, in contrast to the varieties of bonded
labor that were once dominant. One should not
lose sight of this emancipatory element even
when correctly emphasizing the asymmetry built
into the employer-employee relationship, when
clarifying how “free” and “unfree” labor have
differed from each other more gradually than in
principle with respect to many of their everyday
effects, and when appreciating how freedom
from extra-economic compulsion only gradually
prevailed in the course of capitalist industrializa-
tion and how, as is well known, this freedom was
repeatedly rolled back by the massive use of
forced labor in the wars and dictatorships of the
twentieth century.
An immediate expression of wage laborers’
freedom was and is their ability, individually and
collectively, either to defend themselves or—
much more frequently—to formulate and enforce
claims to improvements in working conditions.
Only in capitalism could autonomous labor
movements become strong, and only in the indus-
trial capitalism of the nineteenth century did this
happen in an era when wage labor became a
mass phenomenon inside (but also outside) the
factory.
The energy of the labor movement was ignited,
to put the point in systematic terms, by three
challenges: First, labor movements grew out of ef-
forts to protect against the kinds of insecurity that
routinely increased when the capitalist way of
doing business took hold. Welfare funds, coop-
eratives, and friendly societies come to mind.
Second, the labor movement grew out of the above-
mentioned conflicts over distribution and author-
ity that are inherent in the capital-labor relation-
ship; this was manifested by spontaneous and
organized protests, above all by strikes. Finally,
though, labor movements gained and continue
to gain their energy from defending traditional,
noncapitalist forms of work and living against an
ever more pervasive capitalism, as when the prin-
ciples of a traditional culture embodied in a “moral
economy” (with its emphasis on the “just price”)
were defended against the capitalist logic of indi-
vidualization, competition, changing prices, and
growth.29 In altered form, this thrust has had a
long life, basically lasting through the present time,
as in the struggle for a minimum wage today: it has
taken the form of defending or demanding work
that is just and humane, as opposed to the routi-
nization, degradation, instrumentalization, and
commodification of work under capitalism, a cause
classically formulated in Karl Marx’s critique of
alienation.
This resulted in the development of what was
certainly Europe’s most important movement of
protest and emancipation in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, a movement that con-
tributed mightily to the democratization of poli-
tics and society, even if during the twentieth
century it split into an (internally diverse) social
democratic branch and a Communist-totalitarian
branch that has since become discredited. It was
the pressure of workers’ demands on the shop
floor, during strikes, by trade unions, and in poli-
tics that contributed to the aforementioned im-
provements in working conditions and thus, one
might say, to civilizing capitalism.
Historical comparison makes it clear that labor
movements of this kind were not the inevitable
outcome of the tension between capital and labor.
Instead, underlying the growth of labor move-
ments was a long series of cultural and political
preconditions that existed to a great degree in
large parts of the West in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. These same prerequi-
sites have not survived at the same level of
strength until the present day, nor can they nec-
essarily be found in other regions of the world.
For example, Chinese wage workers today cer-
tainly experience commodification, capitalist in-
strumentalization, uprooting, and exploitation in
a manner that is roughly comparable with what
European workers suffered during the first phase
of industrialization, even if the Chinese experi-
ence has been compressed into a shorter time,
making it especially disruptive. Chinese wage
workers also protest and rebel, in large numbers,
almost daily. Yet in a People’s Republic that con-
tinues to be partially dictatorial, Chinese workers’
actions, without exception local events—protests
and petitions at the workplace, strikes boycotts,
blockades, sit-ins—have so far not coalesced to be-
come a supra-local, supraregional protest and
emancipation movement.30
Two developments in the history of wage labor whose
future is hard to predict merit special mention. For one, in
a trend parallel to the financialization of capitalism, and as
a consequence of changes in technology and market orga-
nization, there has been a discernible fragmentation of
work, including of wage labor, in space and time. Whereas
in the Federal Republic of Germany in 1970, the ratio be-
tween workers in fulltime employment and all others in the
workforce doing part-time and short-time work or are tem-
porarily and marginally employed—in other words, work-
ers in so-called atypical employment conditions—was 5:1,
this shifted by 1990 to 4:1 and 2:1 by 2013. Every third
person in 2013, then, was working either part time, tem-
porarily, on subcontract, or in a mini-job. The elasticity of
gainful employment and the fluidity of working conditions
are on the rise. Demands on the individual’s flexibility are
increasing. The workplace is losing the clear contours that it
first acquired in the nineteenth century. The new commu-
nications media are facilitating new forms of outwork. A
new regime of time is emerging in the gray areas between
working time and free time, with part-time work and flex-
time bringing fresh opportunities as well as new dependen-
cies and risks. The findings need to be assessed in a differ-
entiated way. Not every employment relationship that is
“atypical” in this sense is precarious, especially not every
part-time employment. Undoubtedly, this fluidity also har-
bors new opportunities, for example, to link earning a liv-
ing with other activities, to connect work with leisure, and
to reconcile professional with family life. On the other
hand, there is the danger that making employment condi-
tions more flexible and work more fragmented will lead to
a perilous erosion of individual identities and of social co-
hesion, to the extent that these fixtures of modern life de-
pend on continuous work of the kind that has been the case
in the “work societies” of the West ever since the nineteenth
century. In any event, the binding force of work, its power
to shape structures of social welfare, create cultural ties, and
socialize individuals, seems to have diminished recently.31
Finally, it is worth looking at capitalism and wage labor
in the regions of the “global South” that industrialized
thoroughly only in the last several decades: wage labor
there, which is extremely diverse, is usually researched and
discussed in categories like “informal” and “nonstandard.”
These terms refer to different forms of little-regulated,
barely codified, and therefore highly unprotected and vul-
nerable work in dependent, changing positions. The range
of work includes migrant, seasonal, and casual labor, usu-
ally with extremely low remuneration, in positions of ex-
treme dependency, and mostly linked to other activities as
well as other types of income that need to be put in a fam-
ily context, since one cannot survive on just one of these
income sources. This type of capitalistically influenced
wage labor is justifiably regarded as highly precarious, and
it is performed by workers of both genders (most frequently
by women), also by many children, in the export-oriented
agricultural and foodstuffs industries, in workshops and fac-
tories, and for a wide variety of services, often in slums,
under conditions of extreme insecurity, and in the face
of great and growing inequality. Entrepreneurs, businesses,
and factories—including many multinational concerns
with headquarters in the “global North”—contribute to
the spread of these precarious working conditions through
targeted “outsourcing.” They supply goods for cheap mass
consumption in affluent countries. In Asia, Africa, and
Latin America, they make use of low-paid workers, often
without formally hiring them, and often with the help of
intermediary contractors, subcontractors, or agents. Legal
protections, to the extent they even exist, are frequently
half hearted and frequently circumvented or ignored. State
authorities are often too weak, too partisan, or too corrupt
to proceed effectively against such practices. The category
of those working “informally” is difficult to demarcate and
nearly impossible to register statistically. Rough estimates
indicate a billion worldwide, with the trend on the rise.32
In Europe and North America, the “labor question” has
long since lost the agitating character it once possessed as
a force that stirred up radical protest and unsettled the
class society of the nineteenth and twentieth century. In
western Europe, excoriating the immiseration of the work-
ing class or the alienation of labor has long since ceased to
hold the central place in the critique of capitalism it once
occupied. But this interpretation is conditioned by the
fragmentation along national or regional lines of the men-
tal maps that continue to dominate our minds. If it were
possible to make a truly global perspective the basis for
our moral conscience, sense of social commitment, and
political demands (something that would contravene not
only ingrained habits but also weighty interests in the
global North), the “labor question” would now suddenly
reappear as the “labor question of the global South”: mor-
ally challenging, an urgent problem of social justice, hard
to change, but not hopeless. From a historical perspective,
three questions obtrude:
1. The categorization of this labor as “informal” or
“nonstandard” depends on contrasting such labor
with a model of constant, regulated, codified work
that is assumed to be “formal” or “standard.” Yet
not only does this supposed “standard” represent
just a small minority phenomenon in most socie-
ties of the global South, usually in state-related em-
ployment; in any historical long-term perspective
that includes the global North it is also the excep-
tion, and even in the twentieth century it was not
“normal” in many places, but at best what used to
be (and frequently still is) the norm. If one takes
this seriously, one can hardly avoid questioning
the very categories “nonstandard” and “informal.”
Yet they are hard to replace.
2. The situation in the global South undoubtedly
poses burdensome problems that were absent
from the phase of industrial capitalism’s rise in
Europe and North America. One problem in par-
ticular is the oppressive dependence of a large
part of the work performed on site upon multina-
tional chains and corporations, a dependence as-
sociated with postcolonial inequality between
producers in the South and consumers (including
processing and downstream manufacturers) in
the North. Nevertheless, wage labor of the “infor-
mal,” poorly paid, unprotected, precarious kind
has always existed in Europe, too. It was a mass
phenomenon in eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century Europe, but it persisted as a phenomenon
on the margins of European society in the second
half of the twentieth and the beginning of the
twenty-first century. Yet it was pushed back by
regulated forms of wage labor and, above all, sig-
nificantly defused. For this to happen, economic
growth was an irreplaceable precondition. An-
other contributing factor was the institutionaliza-
tion of wage labor inside enterprises as something
internal to capitalism. Pressure that emanated
from labor movements also carried weight. But,
above all, laws, ordinances, and governmental
controls played a decisive role.
3. If this ocean of informal labor is viewed globally
together with the aforementioned tendencies to-
ward “informalization” that have also been gain-
ing ground in the economically most developed
societies, then one can understand how—parallel
to the financialization of capitalism since the
1970s, and closely associated with this trend—
the “informality” or “informalization” of wage
labor represents a global challenge not likely to
fade away anytime soon. Ultimately, this trend,
like financialization, results from the increasingly
pervasive application of the increasingly
dominant principles of the market to ever more
areas of economy and society under conditions
of digitalized worldwide communication. Allevi-
ating the major social problems that result from
this trend will not succeed without forceful inter-
vention from strong states and their cooperation.
Market and state
In the controversies that have surrounded capitalism, state
and market are usually regarded as antipodes, and for
good reason. Market action and governmental-political ac-
tion are indeed beholden to different logics, especially in
the democratic era. Each one has a different foundation on
which its legitimacy rests: unequally distributed ownership
rights on one side, equal citizenship rights on the other.
They follow different procedures: there one of exchange,
here a process of debate with the aim of building consensus
and deciding by majority. There money is the most impor-
tant medium; here, by contrast, it is power. The pursuit of
particular advantages is the clear goal of market action,
even if it can be claimed, along with Adam Smith, that this
indirectly serves general utility. Attainment of the general
welfare, by contrast, is the aim of politics, even if it is clear
that the content of this public good only emerges out of the
political process, and even if it is conceded that it is legiti-
mate to pursue particular interests within the framework of
the democratic decision-making process. Since the eigh-
teenth century, liberal constitutional orders have justified
restricting the autonomy of both spheres. They have tied
the exercise of political power first to constitutional and
then to democratic foundations, and deliberately not to
economic resources. At the same time, however, they have
secured the right to own property, and everything that en-
sues from ownership, as a basic right, and have therefore
removed it from the grasp of political and state power, no
matter how large the constitutional leeway remains for ar-
ranging the relationship of market to state in different
ways. In constitutional states, political power and the eco-
nomic resources that ensue from property rights limit each
other reciprocally: this is a very fundamental aspect of the
separation of powers that contributes to the guarantee of
liberty.
Over and over again, there have been political configu-
rations in which the opposition between (more) state and
(more) market represented the main controversy. This is
how the issue was posed in the epochal conflict between
the state-run, centrally administered economy and the
capitalist market economy during the Cold War. It has
been a similar divide at issue in the debates about “neolib-
eralism,” deregulation, and privatization since the 1980s.
Nonetheless, it would be wrong to conceive of market
and state exclusively as antipodes. Although, as the fore-
going account has tried to show, a certain institutional
differentiation between market and state, between econ-
omy and government policy, is among the preconditions
for any form of capitalism, a close tie between market and
state, between economy and state policy, has historically
been the rule in one form or another: the variations on
this tie have ranged from the practically symbiotic rela-
tionship between high finance and power during the Mid-
dle Ages, through the close interlinking of state formation
with market formation in early modern Europe, and sub-
sequent government intervention aimed at the social reg-
ulation of wage labor in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, to the increased demand for state intervention
as a result of capitalism’s recent financialization. This se-
ries of examples could be extended to include the im-
portant role of government policy in implementing and
expanding capitalism in the East Asian “tiger states” start-
ing in the 1950s and 1960s and to the more or less dictato-
rial or authoritarian state institutions in China and Russia
over the last several decades.
We may, especially with a view to the West, distinguish
among three unequally long phases for the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries,33 and it looks as if a fourth one
has just begun. In response to the tight fusion of market
and state in the early modern era, which Adam Smith
was up in arms against, the at-core liberal revolutions and
reforms of the Atlantic world in the late eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries ushered in a phase of rela-
tive separation between market and state. States held back
from taking an interventionist stance on economic and so-
cial welfare policy until the 1870s and 1880s. They pro-
moted the self-propelling dynamism of market economies
at the same time that they left these market economies to
their own devices. Talk of weak “night-watchman states”
is, to be sure, completely misleading. In fact, it was during
those decades that nation-states, which were to some ex-
tent just emerging and to some extent developing into
powerful entities, first really gained domestic and foreign
agenda-setting powers. The contributions made by states
to economic and social development were considerable;
one need only think of the expansion in infrastructure
and education, neither one of which most governments
simply abandoned to the free play of market forces. Yet a
policy of economic liberalism and deregulation under the
banner of free trade was the appropriate fit for the kind of
competition between mostly small businesses that was
barely controlled and for a workforce that was still hardly
organized. Although some protective regulation arrived
with the “Factory Acts” and similar regulations (1833 in
England, later in other countries), state support for welfare
remained minimal, and the liberal belief in the freedom
of the individual as something useful for all remained strong.
The 1870s and 1880s brought about a change of trend.
The change was, on the one hand, a reaction to the serious
international crisis of capitalism in the 1870s. On the other
hand, it was also a response to growing social tensions
and especially to the rise of the organized labor movement.
The shift also fit in with the trend toward concentration,
mergers, and comprehensive organization typical of the
managerial capitalism that was emerging in the last quar-
ter of the nineteenth century and increasingly augmenting
the older kind of ownership capitalism. As was demon-
strated by a renewal of interventionism in economic policy
(e.g., nationalized industries), by growing public spending,
but also by initiatives in foreign economic policy that ac-
companied the implementation of imperialism ( protec-
tionist tariffs, subsidies, zones of influence, and colonies
established also for economic purposes), and especially by
the rise of the welfare state starting in the 1880s, state
authorities were now intervening with greater intensity in
economy and society, just as, conversely, economic and
social interests that had become increasingly organized
were now exercising influence on politics and public pol-
icy through their lobbies and interest groups. In place
of the relative distance between market and state culti-
vated by economic liberalism during the preceding phase
of capitalism, the decades prior to the First World War now
witnessed an increasingly tight interdependence between
market and state under the banner of the “organization”
principle. There was talk of “organized” and also of “co-
ordinated” or “controlled capitalism,” whose foundations
had already been laid in the decades prior to 1914.34
Political and economic forces driving expansion were
tightly linked in the epochal phenomenon of imperial-
ism, whose tension-filled rise since the 1880s contributed
mightily to the outbreak of the First and Second World
Wars. The First World War promoted a comprehensive non-
market organization of capitalism in every one of the bel-
ligerent states, even if this was only partial and transitory.
The protectionism of the interwar period widened once
again the distance separating the twentieth century from
the era of classical liberal free trade. The world economic
crisis of the 1930s strengthened anew the inclination of
states to intervene in economic and social processes. This
renewed interventionism assumed a severely undemocra-
tic guise in the dictatorships of Europe and Japan, but it
took on a democratic form in the American New Deal,
which in the 1930s laid the groundwork for a welfare state
even in the United States. After the Second World War, to
be sure, the war economy’s compulsory measures were
abolished and its protectionist encrustations dismantled
step by step. But in other respects—the expansion of the
welfare state and labor legislation, cooperation between or-
ganized interests and state agencies, economic policy in-
creasingly tailored to Keynesian standards, a stronger role
for nationalized sectors and government planning overall,
rudiments of intergovernmental coordination at the global
level—the third quarter of the twentieth century was the
high point of organized capitalism. This thorough entangle-
ment of market and state prompted talk about a “mixed
economy”—a term that drew a dual line of demarca-
tion, distinguishing this order both from the laissez-faire
capitalism of yore and from the centrally administered
economic system under Soviet hegemony. During the third
quarter of the twentieth century, there were many in the
West as well who believed they were on the way into a
postcapitalist phase. Yet realism was on the side of those
observers who diagnosed a new stage of capitalist develop-
ment and talked about “organized capitalism,” “coordi-
nated capitalism,” or even “welfare capitalism.” The Cold
War gave this debate additional momentum. For the Com-
munist challenge repeatedly stimulated an interest in capi-
talism’s capacity for reform.35
In the late 1970s there began a phase of “revived market
capitalism” (Charles Maier). “Neoliberal” theories prizing
the self-regulating forces of the market gained force, a de-
liberate thrust toward deregulation and privatization took
place along with a certain retrenchment in social welfare
services to reverse the major trend line of the previous de-
cades. At the same time, the revival ushered in a shift in
emphasis from organized labor to the side of capital. One
of the causes of this change in direction was undoubtedly
the economic crisis of the 1970s, which forcefully demon-
strated the limits of the system of organized capitalism
that had been dominant up to then by presenting policy
makers with the double problem of mass unemployment
and monetary erosion (“stagflation”). Among the funda-
mental causes deserving special mention is the rapid
growth of global competition, which placed the old indus-
trial countries with their high wage and labor costs under
considerable pressure. It also happened that the function-
ing of organized capitalism in the antecedent decades pre-
supposed a degree of social consensus that was increasing
eroding in some countries, notably England. Since the
end of the 1970s, the United Kingdom, soon joined by the
United States, became the country pioneering this change
of course. But the zeitgeist had also changed, away from
organization and solidarity as leading values, and toward
individualization and appreciating diversity and spon-
taneity. The rapid rise of consumer capitalism fit in with
this trend. The collapse of the Eastern bloc was interpreted
as proof that market forces were superior to planning.
That collapse, moreover, removed the great challenge of a
noncapitalist alternative. During the Cold War, the pres-
ence of such an alternative had increased the willingness
of some representatives of capital and many political ac-
tors to be more responsive toward workers’ demands and
to back a more welfare-conscious social market economy
as a way of forestalling more radical changes.

But it did not come to a real rollback of the state; quite
the contrary. On the European continent, and all the more
so in East Asia, the Anglo-American neoliberal model was
followed only reluctantly or not at all. The dismantling of
social services in Germany, for example, was kept within
very narrow limits even in the last decade of the twentieth
and first decade of the twenty-first century; the frequently
invoked Wende (“turning point”) in German economic
and social policy never took place. There as elsewhere, re-
sistance to the neoliberalization of capitalism remained
unbroken, public spending high. Yet deregulation gained
ground internationally, especially in the field of finance
and as part of the more general financialization of the econ-
omy that set in.36
Whether the international financial crisis since 2008 has
ended the phase of “revived market capitalism” and started
a fourth phase of modern capitalism’s history remains to be
seen. The crisis has profoundly shaken the foundations of
neoliberalism’s legitimation, both political and intellectual.
For, without a doubt, deregulation of the financial sector
was an important cause of the financial economy’s collapse
in 2008, which started in the leading countries embrac-
ing radical market finance capitalism, the United States
and England. And the core convictions of neoliberalism—
autonomy and the self-regulating capacity of markets—
were disclaimed and discredited by the key actors of finance
capitalism themselves in the crisis of 2008 as these capital-
ists practically pleaded with national governments to stave
off their final collapse, which governments—using the ar-
gument “too big to fail”—then did. As a consequence, pub-
lic debt grew by leaps and bounds. The financial market
crisis of capitalism was transformed into a public debt cri-
sis, with damaging consequences whose end is not yet in
sight, especially in Europe. The self-disenchantment of the
neoliberal myth about the market’s self-healing powers
could not have been more thoroughgoing.
Yet the consequences are by no means clear. Certain
tendencies to reregulation of the financial sector have been
introduced, in individual countries as well as interna-
tionally. Yet the influence of the interested parties affected
thereby is great, and that influence is impeding many
a conceivable solution. The subject matter is complicated.
Above all, the power to make and implement political de-
cisions are not nearly strong enough at the supranational
level, although this would be necessary in order to tame a
finance capitalism that has long been globally active.
Whoever wants to compare different types of contempo-
rary capitalism will usually select the different relationships
of market to state as the central criterion distinguishing dif-
ferent “varieties of capitalism” from each other.37 And in-
deed, the relationship of market to state varies greatly from
country to country. Without making any claim to being
exhaustive, this may be illustrated with a few examples.
A kind of organized capitalism with strong state inter-
vention also developed in the United States during the
twentieth century. But it showed up in America more
under the guise of regulation to secure competition ( pro-
hibitions on cartels, antitrust policy), and also in the form
of a military-industrial complex linking private enterprise
with the state. While the American version also included
government-facilitated financing of mass consumption
through easy credit, it had less to do with the provision of
welfare services by the state or with government interven-
tion into the internal affairs of companies. Sweden, by
contrast, proved that a very competitive capitalism is com-
patible not only with a functioning democracy, but also
with state-regulated cooperation between classes, values
oriented toward collective solidarity, and a high level of
welfare state services. Even if in Sweden, too, the “neo-
liberal” about-face starting in the 1980s was tantamount
to a certain streamlining of the welfare state, there was
not nearly such a far-reaching cutback of social services
there as there was in England at the same time. In Ger-
many, which may be regarded as the motherland of orga-
nized capitalism in the late nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies, a variety of “Rhenish capitalism” started to develop
in the 1950s that also included a great deal of state-
supported coordination and a pronounced welfare state
orientation (the “social market economy”). Yet postwar
German economic policy had many fewer instances of di-
rect interventionism than did Sweden or France at the
same time, and there was much greater respect for the self-
regulating capacity of civil society than, for example, in
Japan. There industrialization only started in the late nine-
teenth century, under very strong state guidance from the
outset, although the state’s planning and management
authorities cooperated closely with the country’s gigantic
private enterprises, the zaibatsu, and gave a powerful push
to the development of technology, industry, and exports.
At the same time, authorities in this country of weak trade
unions and enterprises that took care of everything largely
dispensed with the development of a comprehensive wel-
fare state.
Through resolute policies promoting exports, critical
investments in training, and high macroeconomic savings
rates, Hong Kong and Taiwan started to industrialize in
the 1950s, Singapore and South Korea in the 1960s. They
clearly embarked on a course of capitalism and the market
economy, but without exception involving intensive sup-
port and guidance by the state. Singapore’s authoritarian
governmental structure, like that of South Korea’s at the
outset, was much more conducive than cumbersome to
industrialization. China’s modernization in the post-
Maoist era rested, on the one hand, on the market-oriented
energies of broad sections of the population no longer
subjected to constrictions. On the other hand, something
like a “revolution from above” also occurred. The capital-
ist dynamism that quickly gathered pace was initiated
and guided by party cadres and state functionaries, but
they were aiming at a limited release of entrepreneurial
activity and, to this extent, at a certain self-restriction by
the state. The items on the Chinese modernization agenda
included privatizing some state enterprises, melting away
the Maoist welfare state and the security it guaranteed,
and unleashing a massive rural-to-urban migration that
produced exploitation and privation on a scale recall-
ing Europe’s early industrialization. Workers protested
against social decline, exploitation, and insecurity by hold-
ing up pictures of Mao in admonition, while their Com-
munist government was taking advice from the upper
echelons of North American finance capitalism and enlist-
ing the resources, networks, and patriotism of Chinese
living abroad. China has developed a state-monitored in-
dustrial capitalism resting on low wages, hard exploita-
tion of workers, and mass exports that quickly led to great
economic success, immense riches in the hands of a few,
and also to a great deal of protest. The influence of the
state on this kind of industrialization remained strong, al-
though it is abating a little. Most banks, energy and com-
munication enterprises as well as firms in other strategic
branches remain state-owned or at least state-controlled,
there is no free market for real estate, and government in-
terventions permeate both the economy and civil society.
Wages are low by international standards, yet since 2005
they have also been growing in relative terms. On the
whole, most Chinese are doing better today than thirty
years ago. The repressiveness of the political system is pro-
nounced, but it is exercised selectively and guardedly with
regard to the actors involved in economic growth. Over-
all, this is an experiment demonstrating once again the
variety of political conditions under which capitalism—at
least for a time—can flourish. But only time will tell how
compatible market and state are under authoritarian-
dictatorial conditions in the long run. In Russia, the tran-
sition to capitalism in the 1990s led to the state partially
withdrawing itself from the economy, but also to eco-
nomic retrogression, unprecedented inequality, and major
social damage until around 2003, when a strong trend to-
ward reinvigorating the influence of the state became evi-
dent. By way of comparison, India has on the whole been
following a rather liberal course economically for a good
two decades.
State interventions have been indispensable for the
emergence, expansion, and survival of capitalism, as this
historical overview shows. Government interventions into
capitalist market economies are likely to become even more
important over the coming years and decades. There are
three systemic reasons why the need for state intervention
has always been strong and will probably continue to grow.
1. Markets, which make capitalistic conduct possi-
ble in the first place, presuppose framework con-
ditions that can only be established by political
means. Markets cannot do the job of removing
barriers to commerce (e.g., feudal obstacles such
as guild regulations, trade monopolies and privi-
leges, fines and tolls on travel) that fragment and
constrain, of guaranteeing a minimum of peace-
ful order, and of providing rules to conclude and
implement contracts or contract-like agreements.
Without the use of political power, capitalism
would never have taken off, nor can it take off in
the future. Often the preconditions for the exis-
tence of supraregional markets resulted from the
use of force—in war, for example, or in the
course of colonization.
A growing instability of capitalist processes can
be discerned, to the extent that these processes
have become detached over the last several de-
cades from the restrictive but also stabilizing
grounds in which they were once embedded and
have, moreover, become internally differentiated.
This was illustrated above in the case of two dif-
ferent transitions, first from ownership to man-
agerial capitalism, and then with the shift to
capitalism’s current phase of financialization. In
the second transition, the investment function
has been so powerfully detached from its ties to
other functions (such as management of the en-
terprise or personnel policy) that it has become
an independent force, carried away to the point
of self-destruction unless the investment func-
tion can be recaptured and reembedded. In the
search for new ways of embedding finance, state
guidelines and controls need not play the only
role. Civil society-based arrangements become
increasingly relevant, but strong and effective
government intervention remains indispensable.
( The problem is posed in a somewhat different
way, however, outside the North Atlantic area,
where widespread clientelism, patronage, and
corruption—in other words, special ways of “em-
bedding” economic institutions in community,
society, and politics—lead to features of the sys-
tem that have been characterized and criticized
with such catchwords as “patrimonial capital-
ism” and “crony capitalism.”)39
Capitalism, even in its advanced stages, develops
in a way that has disruptive and destructive ef-
fects on its social, cultural, and political envi-
ronment and can call into question its social
acceptance. Here one need only recall the
profound crises, repeated with a certain inevita-
bility, that have a habit of starting out as finan-
cial crises, as in 1873, 1929–1930 und 2007–2008,
yet leave in their wake serious repercussions for
the “real economy,” impair the welfare of broad
sectors of the population, and possibly lead to so-
cial and political disruptions. In equal measure,
though, attention must be drawn to the long-
term polarizing effects of capitalism when it has
been successful. By this I do not mean only the
well-known connection between industrializa-
tion, wage labor, and worker protest, which leads
to social polarization when not counteracted by
welfare state measures. Rather, it is also impor-
tant to mention what is demonstrated by certain
findings from the early modern Netherlands,
from the process of industrialization in the nine-
teenth century, and from experiences over the
last several decades. These different findings all
show that capitalist growth, if not counteracted
with compensatory measures, does not necessar-
ily lead to massive impoverishment—quite the
contrary!—but does go hand in hand with in-
creasing income and wealth inequality. Exorbi-
tantly high managerial earnings, whose lead over
average incomes in the last several decades has
reached dizzying heights, are just a tiny, though
quite visible and especially irritating, aspect of an
increase in inequality that is quite complex. Es-
pecially in democratic political cultures, this
surge in inequality is perceived as unjust, and
over the long run it can call into question the le-
gitimacy of the system.40
Historical experiences show that the destabilizing social
consequences of capitalism can at least be alleviated by
governmental measures if a body politic is strong enough
and capable of mobilizing such measures, even in the face
of resistance, and implementing them with a sense of pro-
portion. In this regard, there is a growing need over the
long run for compensatory and preventive intervention
by the state, especially since the politically active public in
many countries has become more sensitive, more articu-
late, and with a higher level of aspirations, and this criti-
cal public is likely to express its concerns even more in the
future. Political systems, however, often have only a lim-
ited capacity for producing the services that are actually
necessary. It is obvious that such factors as the existence
or lack of a protest culture, the political public’s level of
development, and the peculiarities of each political sys-
tem are very decisive in determining whether economic
and social grievances lead to social movements and gov-
ernment interventions that, should they prove successful,
enhance capitalism’s social acceptability and hence also
its capacity for survival. The rise of the welfare state since
the late nineteenth century is the best example of how
this works. Today an analogous process for civilizing capi-
talism is impeded by the lack of a match between an in-
creasingly global capitalism operating across borders and
the organization of political power still largely structured
around national states. We are a long way from any kind
of transnational global sovereignty that could really check
capitalism’s persistently vigorous dynamism with coun-
tervailing force: this mismatch continues to pose an un-
solved problem.
